Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights

Report on the human rights situation in Ukraine
15 June 2014

1

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

3

II.

METHODOLOGY

6

III.

ACCOUNTABILITY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

7

A. Investigations into human rights violations related to the Maidan protests

7

B. Investigations into human rights violations related to the violence in Odesa
on 2 May
C. Investigations into other human rights violations

9
17

HUMAN RIGHTS CHALLENGES

18

A. Rule of law

18

B. Freedom of peaceful assembly

22

C. Freedom of expression

23

D. Minority rights

23

E. Political rights

24

F. Internally displaced persons

25

PARTICULAR HUMAN RIGHTS CHALLENGES IN THE EAST

27

A. Impact of the security situation on human rights

27

B. Right to life, liberty and security

32

C. Freedom of expression

37

D. Freedom of religion or belief

41

E. Economic, social and cultural rights

41

PARTICULAR HUMAN RIGHTS CHALLENGES IN CRIMEA

48

A. Civil and political rights of Crimean residents

48

B. Economic, social and cultural rights

53

C. Rights of indigenous peoples

55

IV.

V.

VI.

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

55

2

I.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.

The present report is based on findings of the United Nations (UN) Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (HRMMU) covering the period of 7 May – 7 June
2014. It follows two reports on the human rights situation in Ukraine released by the
Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) on 15 April and 16
May 2014.

2.

During the reporting period, the human rights situation in the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions has continued to deteriorate. The 11 March “referendum” on “self-rule” held by
the self-proclaimed “Donetsk People’s Republic” and “Luhansk People’s Republic”,1
albeit without effect under international law, was seen by their representatives as the
first step to the creation of a “Novorossia”. In addition, armed groups have continued to
physically occupy most of the key public and administrative buildings in many cities
and towns of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, and have declared virtual
“independence”, however, the provision of administrative services to the local
population remains with the State.

3.

The presence of armed people and weapons in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk has
increased. Representatives of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” have recognised the
presence within their armed groups of citizens of the Russian Federation, including
from Chechnya and other republics of the North Caucasus. In the period following the
elections, the HRMMU observed armed men on trucks and armoured vehicles moving
around downtown Donetsk in daylight.

4.

The escalation in criminal activity resulting in human rights abuses is no longer limited
to targeting journalists, elected representatives, local politicians, civil servants and civil
society activists. Abductions, detentions, acts of ill-treatment and torture, and killings
by armed groups are now affecting the broader population of the two eastern regions,
which are now marked by an atmosphere of intimidation and consequent fear. Armed
groups must be urged to stop their illegal activities and lay down their arms.

5.

There has also been more regular and intense fighting as the Government has been
trying to restore peace and security over the eastern regions of Donetsk and Luhansk
through security operations involving its armed forces. Local residents of areas affected
by the fighting are increasingly being caught in the cross-fire between the Ukrainian
military and armed groups, with a growing number of residents killed and wounded,
and damage to property. The HRMMU is concerned at the increasing number of reports
of enforced disappearances as a result of the security operations. The Government must
further use restraint of force, and ensure that its security operations are at all times in
line with international standards.2

6.

As a result of these developments, residents of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions live in
a very insecure environment, coupled with social and economic hardships. Daily life is
more and more of a challenge. The HRMMU is gravely concerned that the combination
of the increased number of illegal acts by the armed groups, and the intensification of
fighting between armed groups and Ukrainian forces is raising serious human rights

1

Hereafter referred to as the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Luhansk People’s Republic”.
Human Rights Watch Letter to former Acting President Turchynov and President-Elect Poroshenko dated 6
June 2014, on the conduct of security operations in south-eastern Ukraine in light of the growing number of
credible reports regarding Ukrainian forces’ use of mortars and other weapons in and around populated areas,
and the recent intensifying of hostilities between Ukrainian forces and armed groups.
2

3

concerns, including but not limited to, the fate of the general population, especially
women and children, in the areas under the control of armed groups.
7.

As of 6 June, the departments of social protection in Ukraine’s regions had identified
over 12,700 internally displaced persons (IDPs)3. However, the actual number of
people who have fled the violence and fighting in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk
is believed to be higher and increasing daily.

8.

Freedom of expression continues to be threatened, particularly in the eastern regions,
where journalists face ongoing intimidation and threats to their physical security. Hate
speech, particularly through social media, continue to fuel tensions and to deepen
division between communities.

9.

In Crimea, the introduction of Russian Federation legislation, in contradiction with the
United Nations General Assembly resolution 68/262 and applicable bodies of
international law, hampers the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms. It
has created a legislative limbo as, while Ukrainian legislation was supposed to remain
in force until 1 January 2015, the legal institutions and framework are already required
to comply with the provisions of legislation of the Russian Federation.

10.

Residents in Crimea known for their “Pro-Ukrainian” position are intimidated. The
HRMMU is concerned that many may face increasing discrimination, particularly in
the areas of education and employment. Leaders and activists of the indigenous
Crimean Tatar people face prosecution and limitations on the enjoyment of their
cultural rights. During the reporting period, the situation of all residents of Crimea has
deteriorated with regard to their right to freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly,
association, religion or belief.

11.

From 14 to 19 May, Assistant Secretary-General (ASG) for Human Rights Ivan
Šimonović travelled to Ukraine. During his visits to Kyiv, Donetsk and Odesa, he
discussed the 16 May report with the Government, regional and local officials, the
Ombudsperson and representatives of civil society, and the international community.
The ASG highlighted the importance of prompt follow-up to the recommendations
made in the OHCHR report as a means to de-escalate tensions, in particular ahead of
the Presidential elections.

12.

The investigations under the Office of the Prosecutor General into the Maidan events
continued. On 28 May, a Kyiv court sentenced two police officers who subjected a
Maidan demonstrator to ill-treatment. On 15 May, relatives of those killed on Maidan,
dissatisfied with the perceived slowness of the official investigation, created an
initiative group to conduct their own investigation. The HRMMU remains in regular
contact with the Office of the Prosecutor General and emphasizes the need for the
investigation to be transparent, comprehensive and timely.

13.

With respect to the incidents that took place in Odesa on 2 May, it should be noted that
six official investigations have been established. The main bodies undertaking such
investigations are the Ministry of Interior (MoI) and the State Security Service in
Ukraine (SBU). It is with regret that the HRMMU reports a lack of cooperation from
both governmental bodies, particularly at the central level with the HRMMU, which
has been preventing the HRMMU from conducting a proper assessment of the progress

3

As of 16 June, UNHCR estimate there to be 34,336 IDPs in Ukraine.
According to the Russian Federation Federal Migration Service, as of 6 June, 2014, 837 persons had applied
and were granted refugee status; and 3,750 persons had applied and were granted Temporary Asylum.
Approximately 15% were minors under the age of 18. These figures do not include people from Crimea.

4

made. The HRMMU reiterates the need for prompt and thorough investigations into the
violent incidents on 2 May in Odesa. Some key questions must be addressed to ensure
confidence in the investigation and to guarantee accountability, due process and to
enable the communities to accept fully the results of such an investigation. Among
those questions are the conduct of the police on 2 May: why it, and the fire brigade,
either did not react, or were slow to react; what caused the fire in the Trade Union
building; who are the perpetrators of the killings in the afternoon and the fire in the
evening; and what measures are being taken to guarantee justice for the victims, and
due process for the people detained in connection with these events. Furthermore, the
Government must pay particular attention to ensure social media is not used for hate
speech or incitement to hatred.
14.

A key development during the reporting period was the Presidential election held on 25
May 2014. There were 21 candidates officially on the ballot. On 3 June, the Central
Election Commission (CEC) confirmed that Mr. Petro Poroshenko had won with 54.7%
of the vote. In the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, attacks had taken place every day
during the week preceding the elections and multiplied on election day, with violent
obstruction of polling stations. The pattern of such attacks consisted of representatives
of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Luhansk People’s Republic” and armed
men entering the premises of the district election commissions, threatening staff and
sometimes beating and/or abducting them, often taking away voters’ lists, computers
and official documents. In some cases, the premises of these commissions were seized
and blocked; others had to close either because they became inoperative, or for security
reasons the staff were frightened to come back. Several attacks against district election
commissions and polling stations were reported just prior to, and on, the election day,
with armed men entering polling stations, forcing them to close and/or destroying or
stealing ballot boxes. These illegal acts prevented many people living in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions to exercise their right to vote.

15.

Residents of Crimea had to go to mainland Ukraine to vote. The HRMMU monitored
the situation in the Kherson region, where most of the Crimean voters had registered,
and spoke to representatives of the Crimean Tatars. As they crossed the administrative
border by car to go to vote, representatives of “self-defence forces” reportedly recorded
various personal details, including car license plates and passport numbers. The
HRMMU was informed that many Crimean Tatars did not go to vote due to the cost of
travelling, concerns about crossing the administrative border, and fear of reprisals by
the authorities in Crimea.

16.

During the reporting period, the Government of Ukraine continued to implement the
Geneva Statement.4 National roundtables on constitutional reform, decentralization,
minority rights and the rule of law were held in Kyiv on 14 May, in Kharkiv on 17
May, and in Mykolaiv on 21 May. These meetings brought together former Presidents
Kravchuk and Kuchma, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk, political party leaders, members of
the business community and other civil society organizations. In Kharkiv, Prime

4

The Geneva Statement on Ukraine was issued on 17 April 2014 by representatives of the European Union,
United States, Ukraine and the Russian Federation. It sets out the agreed initial concrete steps to de-escalate
tensions and restore security for all: (1) All sides must refrain from any violence, intimidation or provocative
actions; (2) All illegal armed groups must be disarmed; all illegally seized buildings must be returned to
legitimate owners; all illegally occupied public offices must be vacated; (3) Amnesty should be granted to the
protestors who left seized buildings and surrendered weapons, with the exception of those found guilty of
capital crimes; and (4) The announced constitutional process will be inclusive, transparent and accountable
carried out through a broad national dialogue.

5

Minister Yatsenyuk declared that the Constitution should be amended in order to
provide a special status for the Russian language and national minority languages.
17.

On 13 May, the Parliament adopted the Law “On amending some legislative acts in the
area of state anti-corruption policy in connection with the implementation of the
European Union (EU) Action Plan on the liberalisation of the visa regime for Ukraine”.
The Law provides for more stringent penalties for corruption offences committed by
individuals or legal entities.

18.

On 20 May, Parliament adopted by resolution № 4904 the Memorandum of Concord
and Peace, which was drafted during the roundtable on national unity in Kharkiv on 17
May, and discussed on 21 May in Mykolaiv. Supported by 252 votes (all deputies
except the Communist Party of Ukraine and Svoboda), the document foresees that the
adoption of a constitutional reform package, including the decentralization of power
and a special status for the Russian language; judicial and police reform, and the
adoption of an amnesty law for anti-government protesters in the east who would
accept giving up weapons, except for those who have committed serious crimes against
life and physical integrity. The Parliament called on all to work together to protect,
promote and build a democratic Ukraine, and the peaceful coexistence of all
nationalities, religions and political convictions.

II.

METHODOLOGY

19.

The present report was prepared by the HRMMU on the basis of information collected
during the period of 7 May to 7 June 2014. During this period, the HRMMU continued
to operate pursuant to the objectives as set out at the time of its deployment in March
2014, and in accordance with the same methodology as outlined in its second monthly
report on the situation of human rights in Ukraine issued by OHCHR on 16 May. 5 The
present report does not intend to present an exhaustive account of all human rights
concerns in Ukraine that have been followed by HRMMU during the reporting period.
It rather focuses on those violations and developments which represent particular
human rights challenges at the current juncture or demonstrate trends for potentially
longer-term human rights concerns in the country.

20.

The HRMMU continued to work closely with the United Nations entities in Ukraine. It
is grateful for the support and contributions received for the report from the Office of
the United Nations Resident Coordinator, the Department for Political Affairs (DPA),
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the World Health
Organisation (WHO), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the United
Nations Development Fund (UNDP), the World Food Programme (WFP), the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the International Labour Organisation (ILO), the International Organisation
for Migration (IOM), and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA).

21.

The HRMMU appreciates the close cooperation with international and national
partners, including among others, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE).

5

http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/UA/HRMMUReport15May2014.pdf

6

III.

ACCOUNTABILITY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
A. Investigations into human rights violations related to Maidan protests

22.

Five separate initiatives are ongoing in connection with the investigations into human
rights violations committed during the Maidan events: (1) the official State
investigation is undertaken by the Office of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine in
cooperation with the MoI; (2) a temporary “commission on the investigation of illegal
actions of the law enforcement bodies and individual officials and attacks on the rights
and freedoms, lives and health of citizens during the events connected with the mass
actions of political and civil protests that have been taking place in Ukraine since 21
November 2013” was established by Parliament on 26 December 2013; (3) the
Secretary-General of the Council of Europe initiated, in December 2013, a threemember International Advisory Panel to oversee that the investigations of the violent
incidents which have taken place in Ukraine from November 2013 onwards meet the
requirements of the European Convention on Human Rights and the case-law of the
European Court of Human Rights; (4) a Public Commission on the investigation and
prevention of human rights violations in Ukraine was created on 27 January 2014,
initiated by a group of Ukrainian legal academics; and (5) an initiative group
comprising family members of people who died on Maidan.

23.

The Ukrainian Ombudsperson issued a special report on “Infringement of Human
Rights and Freedoms in Ukraine - The Events of November 2013 – February 2014’.6
Forceful dispersal of Maidan protesters on 30 November 2013

24.

As noted in the previous reports, the violent dispersal of protesters on 30 November
was the first instance of the excessive use of force against peaceful demonstrators, and
triggered further protests.

25.

On 14 May, the Kyiv Pechersky Court postponed a hearing of Oleksandr Popov, former
Head of the Kyiv City administration, and of Volodymyr Sivkovych, former Deputy
Secretary of the National Security and Defence Council, who are under suspicion of
being responsible for the forced dispersal of Maidan protesters on the night of 30
November 2013. The hearing was scheduled after the Kyiv city Court of Appeal
cancelled the decision of the Kyiv Pechersky Court of 31 January 2014 to amnesty
persons responsible for ordering the crackdown of demonstrators by the “Berkut” riot
police under the law of 19 December, which has since then been rescinded.

26.

The hearing planned for 14 May eventually took place on 26 May but was followed by
an incident. About 15 members of the “Maidan self-defence” attacked Oleksandr Popov
after he left the court room. He was doused with water, alcohol and iodine, and
insulted. Members of the police, who were standing by, did not intervene.

27.

During the following hearing, on 5 June, the plaintiffs (representing Maidan victims)
submitted a petition for the revocation of the judge considering the case. The petition
was accepted by the court, leading to the postponement of the hearings until a decision
on the revocation.

6

Ukrainian Parliament Commissioner for Human Rights, Special Report on ‘Infringement of Human Rights and
Freedoms in Ukraine - The events of November 2013 – February 2014’, issued on 28 February, 2014.

7

Criminal proceedings into the killings of 19-21 January and 18-20 February 2014
28.

During 19-21 January 2014, fierce clashes broke out in central Kyiv between the police
and protesters, resulting in the first three casualties among demonstrators. The death
toll rose significantly between 18-20 February, with confrontations taking the lives of
dozens of persons, mostly protesters.

29.

Different figures continue being reported regarding the number of deaths during the
protests in January and February. According to information from the Office of the
Prosecutor General communicated to the HRMMU on 27 May, 76 protesters were
killed as a result of firearm wounds on Hrushevskoho and Institutska streets due to
armed confrontations. On 21 May, the Ministry of Health announced that 106
demonstrators had died during the protests. Information from the NGO “Euromaidan
SOS”, dated 3 June, refers to 113 casualties among protesters (109 in Kyiv and 4 in the
regions).

30.

There are also discrepancies concerning casualties among law enforcement officers: 14
according to the Office of the Prosecutor General; 17 according to the Investigation
Commission of the Parliament of Ukraine on the Maidan events; and 20 according to
the NGO “Euromaidan SOS”.

31.

For investigation purposes, all the killings of protesters by firearms were merged by the
Office of the General Prosecutor into one criminal proceeding. As of 24 April, three
“Berkut” officers had been arrested and officially charged with Article 115 (Murder) of
the Criminal Code. The situation has not changed over the past month and a half. The
killing of law enforcement officers is being investigated by a separate team within the
Office of the Prosecutor General. As of 6 June, no suspects had been identified.

32.

On 20 May, the deputy head of the Kyiv Department of the MoI, Sergiy Boyko,
declared that all documentation related to the activities of the special police unit
“Berkut” during Maidan had been destroyed upon the order of the unit commander in
the last days of February 2014.

33.

On 5 June, the HRMMU met with a representative of an initiative group claiming to
represent about 320 relatives of people killed on Maidan. The group held its first
meeting on 15-16 May, and is planning to initiate an independent investigation into the
events, with the involvement of lawyers and journalists. They consider their initiative
as necessary as they are not satisfied with the ongoing investigations. The group, which
plans to register an NGO entitled “Family Maidan” also intends to support families of
Maidan victims.

34.

On 21 May, the Head of the Parliamentary Investigation Commission on the Maidan
events reported that two persons who had participated in the protests were still missing.
Eleven persons suspected in the killing of demonstrators have been identified, of whom
three were arrested and eight remain at large, allegedly in the Russian Federation. The
Commission is seeking to obtain full and reliable information on violations during
Maidan and will forward evidence to the General Prosecutor’s Office. It has a one-year
mandate and must issue a report to Parliament no later than six months after its
establishment that is by 26 June 2014.

35.

The International Advisory Panel (IAP) of the Council of Europe overseeing the
Maidan investigations held two working sessions in Strasbourg on 9-11 April and 5-7
May 2014. On 16 May, it issued guidelines for NGO submissions and requested input
by 11 June 2014. It also decided to request ‘certain authorities’ to submit information

8

mainly concerning the Maidan investigations. The first meetings of the IAP in Kyiv
will take place at the end of June 2014.
Torture and ill-treatment
36.

On 28 May, the Kyiv Pechersky Court sentenced two police officers for abuse of power
and violence against a demonstrator, Mykhailo Havrylyuk, during the Maidan protests.
Mr. Havrylyuk had been stripped naked in the street by the police in freezing
conditions and forced to stand in the snow while being mocked, assaulted and filmed
with a mobile phone. During the hearings, the defendants pleaded guilty. One of them
was sentenced to three years of imprisonment with a probation period of one year, and
the other to two years, including a one-year probation period.

B.

Investigations into human rights violations related to 2 May Odesa violence
Summary of events

37.

The most serious single incident of significant loss of life in Ukraine since the killings
on Maidan occurred in Odesa on 2 May 2014.7 The events occurred on the same day
that a football match was due to take place between the Kharkiv football team
“Metallist” and the Odesa football team “Chernomorets”. On 1 May, the police
authorities issued an official statement announcing that due to possible disorder
because of the football game, an additional 2,000 police officers would patrol the
streets of Odesa.

38.

Early in the morning of 2 May, at least 600 football fans arrived from Kharkiv. Football
fans from both teams are known to have strong “Pro-Unity”8 sympathies. A pre-match
rally for “United Ukraine” had been planned for 3.00 p.m. on Sobornaya square and
gathered, at least, 2,000 people, including supporters of the two football teams, Right
Sector activists, members of so-called self-defence units, and other “Pro-Unity”
supporters. Right Sector and “self-defence” unit supporters were observed by the
HRMMU wearing helmets and masks, and armed with shields, axes, wooden/metallic
sticks and some with firearms. By 3:00 p.m. the HRMMU had observed 15 police
officers on Sobornaya square and two buses of riot police officers parked nearby.

39.

Meanwhile, the HRMMU observed that about 450 metres away from Sobornaya street,
“Pro-Federalism” activists, comprising approximately 300 activists from “Odesskaya
Druzhina” (radical “Pro-Federalism” movement), had also gathered one hour earlier.
They reportedly intended to prevent the “Pro-Unity” rally; and were wearing helmets,
shields, masks, axes, wooden/metal sticks and some of them with firearms.

40.

The HRMMU observed an insufficient and inadequate police presence to manage and
ensure security, and crowd control of the “United Ukraine” march towards the football
stadium. The HRMMU noted that additional police officers arrived at the scene, but
were unable to stop the violent confrontation.

41.

At 3.15 p.m., the “Pro-Federalism Odesskaya Drujina”, “Narodnaya Drujina” and other
activists approached the Sobornaya square and started to provoke the participants of the
“United Ukraine” rally. Clashes arose and quickly turned into mass disorder, which

7

See also OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 May 2014
(http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Countries/UA/HRMMUReport15May2014.pdf)
8
The terms “Pro-Unity” and “Pro-Federalism” are used in the context as describing the motivations and
orientation of the supporters / activists.

9

lasted for several hours until 6.30 p.m. Police officers and supporters from both sides
were injured during the afternoon. Six men were killed by gunshots fired by activists.
42.

The HRMMU observed that following the clashes in the city centre, some “ProFederalism” activists ran from the area chased by “Pro-Unity” supporters.
Approximately 60 “Pro-Federalism” activists took refuge in the “Afina” shopping
centre, which had been closed during the day. The “Afina” shopping centre was then
surrounded by “Pro-Unity” activists. Riot police (Special Forces “SOKOL”) arrived on
the scene, and reportedly took away 47 “Pro-Federalism” activists, while letting women
out of the complex. Other “Pro-Federalism” supporters ran from the clashes to the tent
camp at the Kulikovo Pole square, where approximately 200 supporters had gathered
(including all the “Pro-Federalism” leaders) during the afternoon.

43.

Some “Pro-Unity” politicians called upon their supporters to march towards the
Kulikovo Pole square. At 7.00 p.m., the “Pro-Unity” supporters marched in that
direction, accompanied behind them by approximately 60 riot police.

44.

The “Pro-Federalism” leaders were informed that “Pro-Unity” supporters were heading
towards the tent camp, and between 6.00 – 6.30 p.m., they decided to take refuge in the
nearby Trade Union Building.

45.

At 7.30 p.m., when the “Pro-Unity” supporters reached Kulikovo Pole square, they
burned all the “Pro-Federalism” tents. The “Pro-Federalism” activists, who had hidden
in the Trade Union Building, and the “Pro-Unity” activists, then reportedly started
throwing Molotov cocktails at each other. Gunshots could reportedly be heard coming
from both sides. At around 8.00 p.m., the “Pro-Unity” activists entered the Trade Union
Building where the “Pro-Federalism” supporters had sought refuge.

46.

During the evening a fire broke out in the Trade Union Building. At 7.43 p.m., the
HRMMU called the fire brigade, which has its base located 650 metres from the Trade
Union Building. Reportedly, the fire brigade only arrived 40 minutes after receiving the
first phone call about the fire. According to fire brigade officials, this was due to the
fact that the police did not create a safe and secure perimeter allowing the fire brigade
to easily access the Trade Union Building. The cause of the fire remains unclear at this
stage.

47.

As a result of the fire, officially 42 people died: 32 (including 6 females) were trapped
and unable to leave the building and 10 (including one female and one minor) died
jumping from windows.

48.

The HRMMU has received information from credible resources that some “Pro-Unity”
protesters were beating up “Pro-Federalism” supporters as they were trying to escape
the Trade Union Building, while others were trying to help them.

49.

247 other people were brought from the scene requiring medical assistance: 27 people
with gunshot wounds, 31 with stab wounds, 26 with burns and intoxication caused by
combustible products and 163 with injuries by blunt objects. Of these, 99 people were
hospitalised, including 22 policemen, with 35 in serious condition. According to
various sources, all those who died were Ukrainian citizens. There are no more official
reports of people missing in relation to 2 May events. Seven of those injured remain in
hospital. The HRMMU received allegations that many who were treated in hospitals
did not give their real names and addresses. Moreover, some people who were heavily
injured from the violence did not go to hospital for fear of retaliation.

10

50.

During the evening, it was reported to the HRMMU that a bare minimum police force
was present at the Kulikovo Pole square. Even when the special riot police force
arrived at the scene, the officers did not intervene in the violence that took place on the
Kulikovo Pole square. The HRMMU was told by high ranking police officers that the
reason for this is that they did not receive any formal order to intervene.
Detentions

51.

The HRMMU has noted slight discrepancies regarding the number of people
arrested/detained/transferred during, and in the aftermath of, the 2 May violence. The
Regional Prosecution Office and the Regional Ministry of Interior present different
figures relating to these events. For example, figures for those arrested in the centre of
town vary from 42 to 47 people, and figures for those arrested at the Trade Union
Building from 63 to 67 people.

52.

Criminal investigations have been launched under the following articles of the Criminal
Code of Ukraine: Article 115/1 (Intentional homicide); Article 194/2 (Intentional
destruction or damage of property); Article 294/2 (Mass riots/unrest); Article 296
(Hooliganism); Article 341/2 (Capturing of the state or public buildings or
constructions); Article 345 (Threat or violence against a law enforcement officer),
Article 365 (Excess of authority or official powers) and Article 367 (Neglect of official
duty).

53.

The 47 “Pro-Federalism” activists who took refuge in the “Afina” shopping centre were
taken away (for so-called protection reasons) by Police Special Forces “SOKOL” and
transferred to two police stations outside Odesa (Ovidiopol and Bilhorod-Dnistrovkyi)
where they were detained for two days.

54.

During this 48 hour period in police custody, detainees were not given food or water on
a regular basis, nor were they provided a one-hour walk per day, as per internal MoI
regulations9.

55.

On 4 May, all 47 detainees were transferred to Vinnitsa (424 km from Odesa).
According to information provided to the HRMMU by credible sources, during the
transfer, which lasted for 12 hours, they received neither food nor water, nor were they
allowed to use toilet facilities (they had to urinate in the detainees van). According to
Ukrainian internal regulations, detainees during transfer should receive food and water.

56.

On 6 May, video court hearings of the “Pro-Federalism” activists were organised with
the Primorsky District Court of Odesa. All were charged with Article 294 (Mass riots)
and/or Article 115 (Intentional homicide) of the Criminal Code; and during the
following days some were given additional criminal charges of either: Article 194/2
(Intentional destruction or damage of property); Article 296 (Hooliganism); Article
341/2 (Capturing of the state or public buildings or constructions); or Article 345
(Threat or violence against a law enforcement officer). According to the court
decisions of the 47 arrested, 14 were placed in the Vinnitsa pre-trial detention centre.
Four of these, after appealing the court decision, were placed under house arrest and
have since reportedly returned to Odesa. 33 of the 47 individuals originally arrested
were placed under house arrest as of 10 June 2014. Late in the evening of 2 May, 67
people were arrested at the Trade Union Building and transferred to the Odesa City
Police Station, where they were detained for two days. On 2 and 3 May, all were

9

Ministry of Interior regulation Number 60 dated 20/01/2001: warm food three times per day, and one hour
walk per day.

11

charged with either Articles 115 (Intentional homicide) or Article 294 (Mass riots) of
the Criminal Code. On 4 May at 5.00 p.m., the Odesa City Police Station was stormed
by relatives and friends of the “Pro-Federalism” movement. Under unclear
circumstances all of the 67 detainees were “released” by the police.
57.

In addition to those arrested on 2 May, the MoI arrested at least four other people. On 6
May, one of the leaders of the “Pro-Federalism” movement was arrested and charged
under Article 294 of the Criminal Code. He is currently detained in a pre-trial detention
centre. On 18 May, a “Pro-Unity” activist was arrested, accused of firing at, and
injuring several people in the city centre on 2 May, including police officers, “ProFederalism” activists and journalists. He was first transferred to the Investigation
Department of Odesa Regional Police Office, before being transferred to Kyiv. He is
accused under Article 115 (Murder) and Article 294-2 (Mass riots) of the Criminal
Code and on 21 May, he was placed under house arrest in Odesa by the Kyiv Pechersky
District Court.

58.

Of the arrests conducted between 2 May and 3 June, in connection with the
investigations into the 2 May violence, 13 persons remain in pre-trial detention centres
under the Penitentiary Services (either in Vinnitsa, Odesa or Kyiv) charged with one or
more of the following six articles of the Criminal Code: Article 115/1 (Intentional
homicide); Article 194/2 (Intentional destruction or damage of property); Article 294/2
(Mass riots/unrest); Article 296 (Hooliganism); Article 341/2 (Capturing of the state or
public buildings or constructions); and Article 345 (Threat or violence against law
enforcement officer).

59.

In addition, reportedly 40 people were placed under house arrest in Odesa charged with
the following articles of the Criminal Code: Article 115/1 (Intentional homicide);
Article 194/2 (Intentional destruction or damage of property; Article 294/2 (Mass
riots/unrest); Article 296 (Hooliganism); Article 341/2 (Capturing of the state or public
buildings or constructions); and Article 345 (Threat or violence against law
enforcement officer).

60.

Two cases concerning “Pro-Unity” activists suspected of shooting and killing persons
during the 2 May violence, were heard by the Pechersky District Court of Kyiv,
following the arrest of two suspects on 18 and 26 May. Both were given house arrest;
both are charged under Article 294 (Mass riots), and one has been additionally charged
under Article 115 (Murder) of the Criminal Code.
Due process rights during, and after, the 2 May violence

61.

The HRMMU visited detainees held in the pre-trial detention centre in Odesa. The
Penitentiary Services administration fully cooperated with the HRMMU and granted
access to several detainees (including one female) with whom private interviews were
carried out. The detainees did not complain about their conditions of detention or
physical treatment in the pre-trial detention centre in Odesa. They confirmed they were
able to meet privately with their lawyers.

62.

The HRMMU also met with lawyers, victims, witnesses, detainees and relatives with
regard to the 2 May violence.
It also held numerous meetings with the
Ombudsperson’s team, as well as representatives of law enforcement agencies, mass
media, local politicians and officials, activists and local officials. Through its
monitoring, the HRMMU has identified various human rights concerns with regard to
the on-going criminal investigations, which include some of the following.

12

Timely notification of reasons for arrest and charges within short period of time
63.

On 15 May, the SBU apprehended five additional people. Although this took place at
9.00 a.m., the official arrest time has been recorded as 11.50 p.m. – over 12 hours later.
According to Article 208/4 of the Criminal Procedure Code ‘a competent official who
apprehended the person, shall be required to immediately inform the apprehended
person, in a language known to him, of the grounds for the apprehension and of the
commission of what crime he is suspected’. Furthermore, the procedure applied for the
arrest was not in line with Articles 9.2 and 9.3 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (ICCPR).

64.

Similarly eight people apprehended by the SBU on 27 May at the Odesa railway station
did not receive prompt notification of the reasons for their arrest.
Right to a fair trial

65.

Law enforcement agencies resorted to an illegal practice in order to prevent prompt
access to legal counsel. Indeed, during criminal interrogation procedures, police and
SBU officers summoned individuals as “witness” and later then substituted their status
as “suspect” and/or substituted their interrogation by interviewing. This resulted in
violating the persons’ right to see and consult a legal counsel (as provided for in Article
208/4 of the Criminal Procedural Code) and gave an opportunity to “delay” the official
time of apprehension.

66.

For instance, the eight people who were arrested by the SBU at the Odesa railway
station were transferred to the SBU for an alleged “interview”. They were not informed
about their rights with regard to apprehension, nor were they provided with legal
counsel, nor could they contact their lawyers before and during interrogation.

67.

The HRMMU observed, based on interviews with detainees and their relatives, that the
governmental Free Legal Aid scheme (established in connection with the new Criminal
Procedural Code of November 2012) encountered gaps in its system. For the legal
defence of detainees arrested during and after 2 May violence, the Free Legal Aid
system could not provide enough lawyers.

68.

As of 4 June, the legal status of the 67 “detainees” released on 4 May from Odesa city
Police Station remained unclear. Due to procedural gaps following their alleged illegal
release (i.e. without a court decision), they remain suspects. The measure of restraint
was not applied to them as required in accordance with the Criminal Procedural Code.
Right to medical care

69.

In Ovidiopol and Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi Police Stations medical care was not provided
to those among the 47 detainees who required such assistance due to illness. The
relatives of detainees placed in custody in the Vinnitsa pre-trial detention centre also
reported about the lack of medical care provided to their kin.
Personal data

70.

Concerns have been raised with the HRMMU that on 19 May, the presumption of
innocence may have been violated during an official press conference of the MoI, by
the Deputy Minister of Interior/Head of Main Investigation Unit by disclosing personal
data of 12 detainees. The HRMMU reminds the authorities of the importance of
respecting international standards concerning the presumption of innocence and the
prohibition of arbitrary interference with one’s privacy or attacks upon his/her honour
and reputation.

13

71.

Also on 3 May, the SBU published the names and passports of three citizens from the
Russian Federation allegedly involved in the 2 May violence.
Legality of arrest

72.

On 15 May, the SBU conducted an illegal search of an apartment from 8.00 p.m. to
3.00 a.m., without a search warrant and without preparing a report/protocol on the
search. During the search, they broke the door, forced the family, including a girl to lie
down on the floor. A woman (wife/mother) was subsequently arrested and taken to the
SBU Office. The next day she was transferred to the Odesa Police Station. On 17 May,
the Primorsky District Court placed her in custody under Articles 294 (Mass riots) and
110 (Trespass against territorial integrity and inviolability of Ukraine) of the Criminal
Code. She is currently detained in Odesa pre-trial detention centre.
Accountability: Update on investigations into the Odesa incidents

73.

Six official investigations have been initiated to look into the incidents of 2 May in
Odesa and are ongoing: 1) a criminal investigation by the MoI; 2) an investigation of
the General Prosecution Investigation Unit into police conduct; 3) a criminal
investigation by the SBU into alleged state level crimes (including actions aimed at
forceful change or overthrow of the constitutional order); 4) an investigation by the
Ombudsperson; 5) an investigation by the Parliamentary Commission; and 6) an
investigation by a commission comprising civil society representatives under the
auspices of the Governor. During his visit in May, ASG Šimonović met with
interlocutors involved in these various investigations.

74.

These parallel investigations by different bodies present a high risk of
miscommunication between the various law enforcement agencies’ commissions,
which may impact the integrity of the criminal investigations. Furthermore, there
appear to be widespread concerns among citizens regarding the ability of local law
enforcement agencies to conduct independent and thorough investigations due to the
politicisation of the 2 May events. The day after the violence, the former acting
President dismissed several local high-ranking officials on the grounds of Article 365
(Excess of authority or official powers) and Article 367 (Neglect of official duty) of the
Criminal Code). An interim government and new officials were appointed at the local
level: the Governor of Odesa, the Head of the Regional MoI, the Head of the Odesa
City Police, and the Head of the Regional Prosecution Office.
Governmental Commission on the issues of numerous deaths of people during
“Pro-Ukrainian” protests and fire in the Trade Union Building in Odesa City

75.

During the late evening of 2 May, Vice-Prime Minister Vitalii Yarema was appointed
Head of the Governmental Commission on the issues of numerous deaths of people
during “Pro-Ukrainian” protests and the fire in the Trade Union Building in Odesa City,
which is responsible for overseeing the investigation carried out by the law
enforcement agencies at the Odesa regional and city level. The HRMMU has officially
requested to meet with this Commission, but had not received a response as of 7 June
2014.
Criminal investigation by the Ministry of Interior Investigation Unit

76.

On 2 May, a criminal investigation was launched by the Odesa Regional Police
Investigation Department. On 6 May, the responsibility for the investigation was
transferred to the Main Investigation Department of the MoI in Kyiv (under the lead of
Deputy Minister of Interior). According to the law, the investigation process should be
14

completed in 60 days. Investigators from Kyiv, Odesa and other regions are
cooperating on this investigation, which has been launched under the following articles
of the Criminal Code of Ukraine: Article 115/1 (Intentional homicide); Article 194/2
(Intentional destruction or damage of property; Article 294/2 (Mass riots/unrest);
Article 296 (Hooliganism); Article 341/2 (Capturing of the state or public buildings or
constructions); and Article 345 (Threat or violence against law enforcement officer).
General Prosecution Investigation Unit regarding police duty performance
77.

On 3 May, the Odesa Regional Prosecutor Office launched a criminal case against four
police officials under Article 365 (Excess of authority or official powers) and Article
367 (Neglect of official duty) of the Criminal code. On 6 May, this investigation was
transferred to the Investigation Unit of the General Prosecutor.

78.

According to information provided to the HRMMU by credible sources, the regional
MoI did not enforce the special police tactical plan called “Wave” (“Khvylia”), which
would have allowed the use of special police means and forces, and ensured
coordination of all official emergency units (e.g. health, and the department of
emergency situations).

79.

Furthermore, there are credible reports that during the 2 May violence, all high ranking
officials from the Regional MoI and Regional Prosecutor’s Office were holding a
meeting and were unavailable.

80.

Since then, several criminal proceedings have been initiated against high-ranking police
officials and policemen. The Deputy Head of the Regional MoI was placed under house
arrest in relation with the 2 May violence and the “release” of the 67 detainees held in
the Odesa Police Station on 4 May. His current whereabouts remain unknown but he is
thought to be outside Ukraine. On 8 May, the Head of the Odesa City Police, the Head
of the Odesa Police Detention Centre and the duty officer were apprehended and
transferred to Kyiv. On 9 May, the Head of the Odesa City Police was released on bail.
Both The Head of the Odesa Police Detention Centre and the duty officer were also
released under obligations to make a personal commitment not to leave Ukraine.
Criminal investigation under the State Security Service of Ukraine (SBU)

81.

In mid-March, the SBU initiated a criminal investigation throughout the country under
Articles 109 (Actions aimed at forceful change or overthrow of the constitutional order
or take-over of government) and 110 (Trespass against territorial integrity and
inviolability of Ukraine) of the Criminal Code in relation to threats to national security
and national integrity. As of 15 May, the SBU arrested several people in Odesa region.
According to the HRMMU informal sources, 18 people were placed under investigation
by the SBU and detained in the Odesa pre-trial detention centre between 2 May and 3
June.

82.

On 15 May, the SBU arrested five people (four male and one female) who were
allegedly leaving the Odesa region to join armed groups in eastern Ukraine. The
woman was placed under house arrest. Later that day another female “Pro-Federalism”
supporter, allegedly the organiser of the expedition, was arrested and placed in pre-trial
detention in Odesa. One more person was arrested the following day in connection with
the same case. As of 7 June, the HRMMU had no information on his whereabouts.

83.

On 27 May, eight men were arrested at the Odesa railway station from a train about to
depart for Moscow. The SBU stated that these people were planning to attend a
“paramilitary training” in Moscow before joining the armed groups in eastern Ukraine.

15

On 29 May, the Primorsky District Court charged all of them under Articles 109
(Actions aimed at forceful change or overthrow of the constitutional order or take-over
of government) and 110 (Trespass against territorial integrity and inviolability of
Ukraine) of the Criminal Code. They have been placed in custody in the pre-trial
detention centre in Odesa. One more person was arrested the following day in
connection with the same case. As of 7 June, the HRMMU had no updated information
on his whereabouts.
84.

On 28 May, three men, members of the NGO "Orthodox Cossacks", were arrested in
Odesa and on 31 May, they were charged by the Primorsky District Court under
Articles 109 and 110 of the Criminal Code, and placed in custody at the pre-trial
detention centre in Odesa.
Parliamentary Interim Commission of inquiry into the investigation of the death of
citizens in the cities of Odesa, Mariupol and other cities of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions of Ukraine.

85.

On 13 May, the Parliament adopted decision 4852 establishing an” Interim Inquiry
Parliamentary Commission on the investigation of the death of citizens in the cities of
Odesa, Mariupol and other cities of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine”,
further to a proposal by parliamentarians representing the Odesa region. The mandate
of this Commission expires on 15 June, by which date it is to submit its report to
Parliament.

86.

The Commission informed the HRMMU that it had already gathered a lot of
information on the violence of 2 May in Odesa, which should be properly analysed and
processed. According to the Head of the Parliamentary Commission, its members met
with officials from Odesa, including the regional SBU divisions, MoI, Prosecutor’s
Office, independent experts, NGOs and suspects under house arrest. He believes many
people are still frightened by the events with some afraid to share important
information. Moreover, he highlighted that the situation in Odesa is not stable yet, and
it is important to optimise the activities of law enforcement bodies in the investigation.
According to him, the criminal investigation by the MoI had only conducted
approximately 7% of the necessary work. The perpetrators of the Odesa events have
still not been identified, with some suspects detained for a few days and then released
by courts. From information gathered by the Commission, there is much questioning
within local communities as to why this happened. There is also a fear that the local
population will use reprisals against suspected persons for the restoration of justice.
Thus, according to the Head of the Commission, the Special Interim Parliamentary
Commission has intensified its contacts with the local community representatives.
Investigation by the Ombudsperson’s Office

87.

The Ombudsperson’s Office initiated an evaluation on human rights violations by law
enforcement agencies during the 2 May violence in Odesa. The Ombudsperson and her
team visited Odesa on several occasions and were provided with official documents
from all law enforcement agencies.10

10

The Ombudsperson submitted a report of her findings to the Prosecutor General on 10 June 2014. It is not a
public document.

16

Commission investigating the 2 May violence
88.

A commission was established under the auspices of the Head of the Odesa Regional
State Administration (Governor). This commission, which includes civil society
activists, journalists and experts, is conducting its own investigation and intends to play
a public oversight role concerning the official investigation.

89.

The commission members are undertaking their work through open sources, without
interfering with the official investigation. It is foreseen that their conclusions will be
published only if all members agree on its content. A first official briefing took place
on 30 May.
Specialised Headquarters providing assistance in the aftermath of 2 May

90.

In the aftermath of the 2 May events, the former acting Mayor of Odesa established an
emergency headquarters (HQ) encompassing various departments of the City Council
Executive Committee. It provided assistance to victims and their relatives, such
healthcare, information, social services. It also ran an emergency hotline in the
aftermath of 2 May incidents. The HRMMU has been in daily contact with the staff on
follow-up required, and to enquire about the situation of the victims, particularly
medical care and the list of those declared missing. As of 7 June, the Social Welfare
Department remained the only operational part of this emergency HQ.

91.

After the 2 May violence the HRMMU has been monitoring the criminal proceedings
launched by the Office of the General Prosecutor, the MoI and the SBU.

92.

As the investigations continue, some key questions must be addressed to ensure
confidence in the investigation and to guarantee accountability, due process and to
enable the communities to fully accept the results of such an investigation. Issues to be
clarified include:
a. the identification of the perpetrators who were shooting at protesters during

the afternoon;
b. the conduct of the police on 2 May - why the police and the fire brigade either

did not react, or were slow to react and who ordered what action;
c. what happened in the Trade Union Building and what caused the fire there;
d. what was the cause of the deaths in the Trade Union Building;
e. the identification of the perpetrators of the incidents and violence surrounding
f.

the fire in the Trade Union Building;
the need to guarantee justice for the victims and due process for the detainees.

92.

The HRMMU regretfully reports the lack of cooperation from the MoI and the SBU at
the central level.

93.

The HRMMU reiterates the need for prompt, thorough and impartial investigations into
the events so as to ensure accountability of all those concerned and to provide redress
and reparations for victims and their families. This process is critical to restore people’s
confidence in the authorities.
C.

94.

Investigation into other human rights violations

The HRMMU continues to follow closely the investigation into the human rights
violations that occurred in March in 2014 in Kharkiv, including into the “Rymarska
case”, a clash between pro-Russian and pro-Ukrainian organizations “Oplot” and
“Patriots of Ukraine” on 13 March. On 7 May, it was confirmed that the case had been
transferred from the police to the SBU. Investigations were opened in connection with

17

the role of the police in this case, as well as during the attack by protesters against the
ATN TV station on 7 April. On 5 June, the Deputy Head of the regional SBU informed
the HRMMU that the investigation into “Rymarska case” was ongoing - there were two
suspects, who still had to be detained. The challenging aspect of the investigation is that
many minors participated in the incident, which requires additional measures to ensure
due process.
IV.

HUMAN RIGHTS CHALLENGES
A.

95.

Rule of law

During the reporting period, the HRMMU monitored legal and policy developments
affecting human rights and the rule of law. These include the adoption of a
“Memorandum on Concord and Peace” resulting from national roundtable discussions;
legislative amendments to combat discrimination, corruption, and on the situation of
refugees; developments relating to amnesty, lustration of judges, language rights,
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from Crimea, ethnic policy, torture and illtreatment, the media and the reform of law enforcement agencies.
Constitutional reform

96.

Pursuant to an Order of the Cabinet of Ministers of 17 April 2014, debates were
organized on constitutional amendments proposing the decentralization of power to
regions. In accordance with the Geneva Statement of 17 April, roundtables on national
unity, co-organized by the Government of Ukraine and the OSCE, were held on 14, 17
and 21 May. At the first roundtable in Kyiv, the eastern regions of the country were
largely under-represented, with the only official being the Mayor of Donetsk, Mr.
Lukyanchenko (Party of Regions). During the roundtable in Kharkiv, acting Prime
Minister Yatsenyuk declared that the constitution should be amended in order to
provide a special status for the Russian language and national minority languages. With
more representatives present from the east, including local parliamentarians, various
perspectives were raised; at the same time, this brought to the fore an array of diverging
views on the way forward. The roundtable also prepared a Memorandum containing
provisions for a unified society, changes to the Constitution, increasing the local
authorities’ role, and decentralisation of state power.

97.

On 20 May, through resolution 4904, Parliament adopted the “Memorandum of
Concord and Peace”, which was drafted during the second roundtable discussion in
Kharkiv. This document foresees the adoption by Parliament of a constitutional reform
package, including the decentralization of power, a special status for the Russian
language, judicial and police reform, and an amnesty law for anti-government
protesters in the east who accept to give up their weapons (except for the perpetrators
of serious crimes against life and physical integrity). The Parliament called on all to
work together to protect, promote and build a democratic Ukraine, and the peaceful
coexistence of all nationalities, religions and political convictions.
International Criminal Court

98.

On 23 May, former acting President Oleksandr Turchynov requested the Constitutional
Court to assess whether the Constitution of Ukraine would preclude the ratification of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC). The document was signed
on 20 January 2000. On 25 February 2014, the Parliament recognised the jurisdiction of
the ICC for acts committed in Ukraine from 21 November 2013 to 22 February 2014.
18

On 9 April, Ukraine informed the Registrar of the Court about this decision. On 25
April, the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC announced a preliminary examination on
the situation in Ukraine to establish whether all the statutory requirements for the
opening of an investigation are met.
99.

A Member of the Parliament of Ukraine from Odesa, Sergey Kivalov, registered on 15
May a draft resolution which aims to create the legal and institutional conditions for
those responsible for the deaths of dozens of people in Odesa, on 2 May, to be tried by
the ICC. As of 7 June, the draft resolution11 had not been considered by Parliament.
Crimea

100. On 5 June, Parliament adopted, on first reading, amendments to the Law of Ukraine

“On Securing Citizens’ Rights and Freedoms and the Legal Regime on the Temporary
Occupied Territory of Ukraine”. These amendments aim at making the registration
procedure for those displaced from Crimea easier and faster, especially for those who
wish to re-register their business. Thus, IDPs from Crimea in mainland Ukraine will no
longer need other documents than the national passport.
Amnesty
101. During the reporting period, no actual progress was made in adopting an amnesty law

in relation to the events in the east of the country. On 18 April 2014, the Cabinet of
Ministers prepared a draft law “On the prevention of harassment and punishment of
persons in relation to the events that took place during mass actions of civil resistance
which began on 22 February 2014". The text would exempt from criminal liability all
those who attempted to overthrow the legal government; took part in riots; seized
administrative and public buildings; and violated the territorial integrity of Ukraine,
provided they agreed to voluntarily cease all illegal actions and were not guilty of
“particularly serious crimes”. Four other so-called “amnesty laws” were registered in
Parliament by different political parties between 9 and 23 April. On 6 May, a draft
resolution was registered, calling on Parliament to make the draft law submitted by the
Cabinet of Minister the basis for the adoption of an amnesty law. During his
inauguration speech, on 7 June, President Poroshenko offered to amnesty protesters
who did not have “blood on their hands”.
Discrimination
102. On 13 May, Parliament adopted amendments to the Law “On preventing and

countering discrimination”. The amendments bring the definitions of direct and indirect
discrimination in line with Ukraine’s obligations under the ICCPR and other
international human rights instruments. They include, in particular, the prohibited
grounds listed in Article 2(1) of the Covenant (except “birth”). It should be noted,
however, that the amendments do not integrate the jurisprudence of the UN Human
Rights Committee on the prevention of discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation. The amendments also provide for criminal, civil and administrative liability
in case of discrimination. While these are positive changes, other legal texts, notably
the Criminal Code, must be brought in line with the anti-discrimination amendments in

11

Draft resolution “On the recognition by Ukraine of the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court
concerning crimes against humanity having led to very serious consequences, deliberate and planned of mass
killing of citizens in a particularly brutal and cynical way during the peaceful protests on 2 May 2014 in Odesa,
and concerning all perpetrators of these crimes, and on the request to the International Criminal Court to bring
the perpetrators to justice”.

19

order to ensure effective remedies for victims and contribute to enhanced prevention of
discrimination.
Anti-corruption
103. On 13 May, Parliament adopted the Law "On amending some legislative acts Ukraine

in the area of state anti-corruption policy in connection with the implementation of the
EU Action Plan on the liberalisation of the visa regime for Ukraine”. The Law provides
for more stringent penalties for corruption offences committed by individuals or legal
entities. In particular, the liability for providing knowingly false data in the declaration
of assets, income and expenses is introduced to the Code on Administrative Offences.
The Law also strengthens the protection of persons reporting on corruption, for
instance, providing for anonymous phone lines for reporting corruption. An external
control of declarations of assets, income, expenses and financial obligations is also to
be introduced. While the amendments are welcome, the key to combatting corruption
lies in the readiness of all government institutions to effectively tackle this phenomenon
and to implement anti-corruption norms in place. In this regard, the HRMMU recalls
that in its concluding observations adopted in May 2014, the UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights called on Ukraine to “make politicians, members
of parliament and national and local government officials aware of the economic and
social costs of corruption, and make judges, prosecutors and the police aware of the
need for strict enforcement of the law”.
Torture and ill-treatment
101. On 3 June, the Minister of Justice announced at a press-conference the establishment of

a Special Committee to carry out random inspections of penitentiary institutions, with
broad powers to check violations of human rights and the detention conditions of
prisoners. The Committee will be a permanent body and is to produce monthly reports.
It will comprise representatives of the Ministry of Justice and representatives of civil
society.
102. While welcoming this step, the HRMMU notes that the Ombudsperson was designated

by law as the National Preventive Mechanism (NPM) against torture, in line with the
Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention against Torture. As such, it is
entrusted to conduct visits to places of deprivation of liberty, with the involvement of
civil society, and with a view to preventing human rights violations affecting detainees
or contributing to their elimination. Due to the obvious similarities between mandates
of the Special Committee and the NPM, proper coordination and consultations between
these bodies will be required to ensure the effectiveness of efforts to combat torture and
ill-treatment.
Lustration
103. The Interim Special Commission on the vetting of judges was established on 4 June,

pursuant to Article 3 of the Law "On the restoration of trust in the judiciary in
Ukraine”, which entered into force on 10 May. The Commission consists of five
representatives from the Supreme Court, the Parliament and the Governmental
Commissioner on the Issues of the Anti-Corruption Policy. Legal entities and
individuals will have six months from the date of advertisement of the establishment of
the Commission in the newspaper "Voice of Ukraine" to request examination (vetting)
of judges. Public information about the activities of the Interim Special Commission
will be published on the official website of the High Council of Justice of Ukraine. The
HRMMU reiterates its concern that the immediate dismissal of judges by the Special
20

Commission may put in jeopardy the administration of justice. Any lustration initiatives
should be pursued in full compliance with the fundamental human rights of the people
concerned, including the right to individual review and the right of appeal.
Ethnic and national policy
104. The Minister of Culture stated on 4 June that the Cabinet of Ministers decided to

establish a ‘Council of interethnic consensus’ and to create the position of a
Government commissioner for ethnic and national policy. This official, who has not
been appointed yet, will reportedly be responsible for the implementation of the ethnic
and national policy developed by the Government.
Language
105. On 4 June, a draft law was submitted to Parliament “On the official status of the

Russian language in Ukraine”. The draft law proposes to give “official status” to the
Russian language without compromising the position of Ukrainian as the state
language. The bill proposes to introduce the wide usage of Russian language in state
institutions, courts, educational institutions, mass media, official publications of
legislation and by-laws, pre-trial investigation, advertising and labelling of goods.
Media
106. On 4 June, the Cabinet of Ministers instructed the State Committee on television and

radio broadcasting to prepare a draft law "On Amending Certain Legislative Acts of
Ukraine regarding resisting informational aggression of foreign states". Other
ministries and agencies that will participate in the drafting of the bill will include the
Ministry of Economic Development, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Justice, Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, MoI, State Security Service, the National Council on Television and
Radio Broadcasting, and the State Committee on Entrepreneurship of Ukraine. This
development comes after a Ukrainian court banned, in March 2014, broadcasting by
four Russian TV channels in Ukraine, and armed groups in the east having disrupted
broadcasting of Ukrainian channels.
107. The HRMMU is of the view that professional journalism and critical thinking, not

prohibition, are the proper answers to the attempts to distort or manipulate facts.
Everyone, in accordance with article 19 of the ICCPR, should have the right to hold
opinions without interference and to freedom of expression, which includes freedom to
seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers.
Refugees
108. On 13 May, Parliament adopted amendments to the refugee Law extending the

definition of complementary protection to include persons fleeing armed conflict and
other serious human rights violations. This brings the definition of complementary
protection into line with international and European standards.
109. The HRMMU notes, that certain legal gaps remain, affecting particularly the quality of

due process in the asylum procedure and the reception conditions for asylum-seekers.
The quality of decision-making on asylum applications also remains of concern, as well
as the fact that State funding for asylum matters is inadequate.
Martial law
110. On 3 June, former acting President Oleksandr Turchynov signed decree № 936/2014

“About considering the question of the introduction of martial law in certain areas of
Ukraine”. The decree requests the Secretary of the Council of the National Security and

21

Defence of Ukraine to “immediately cooperate with the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine,
the Ministry of Interior of Ukraine, the Security Service of Ukraine, the Administration
of the State Border Service of Ukraine to consider the question about the need to
impose martial law in the Donetsk and Luhansk Regions, where the security operation
is taking place, to prevent further development and ensure the ending of the armed
conflict on the territory of Ukraine, to prevent mass deaths of civilians, military
personnel and members of law enforcement agencies, to stabilize the situation and
restore normal life in these regions”.
Law enforcement sector reform
111. On 4 June, Prime Minister Arseniy Yatseniuk instructed the Cabinet of Ministers to set

up a working group that will prepare legislation to reform the law enforcement system
by 1 August 2014. The working group will be headed by First Vice-Prime Minister,
Vitaliy Yarema, who stressed the need to develop draft laws on the police, the security
service and the prosecutor’s office. Experts from the European Commission and Poland
will assist the working group.
112. On 5 June, Parliament adopted the Law "On Amendments to the Law of Ukraine on

combating terrorism". The law provides a definition of a Counter-Terrorist Operation
(CTO), the authority of the CTO participants and other innovations. It also prescribes
the possibility of "physical elimination of the terrorists" in case of resistance. Speaking
at a press conference, the former acting Head of the Presidential Administration gave
his support to the introduction of martial law in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, as
well as in the border areas of seven other regions of Ukraine.
B.

Freedom of peaceful assembly

113. After the 2 May events in Odesa, a police presence has been highly visible during

peaceful assemblies in all major cities of Ukraine. However, the real or perceived
inaction of law enforcement is a further challenge to ensuring accountability at such
events such as demonstrations, rallies and pickets.
114. Ahead of 9 May (Victory Day), for instance, security was heightened with numerous

checkpoints on roads in several cities the programme of celebrations was changed in
order to avoid situations that could provoke unrests, for example by cancelling parades.
Public commemorations and rallies took place in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Lviv and in many
cities in western and central Ukraine. In Donetsk, a rally gathering 2,000 persons went
peacefully.
115. However, legislation is required to regulate the conduct of assemblies in line with

international standards, as previously recommended by the HRMMU.12
116. A trend of local administration requesting courts to take measures to prevent peaceful

assemblies illustrates the need for relevant legislation. For instance, on 4 June, the
Mykolaiv District Administrative court decided to ban until 30 June all rallies planned
in the city centre further to a request from the City Council. The Mykolaiv City Council
had requested such a prohibition after 2 June when the police intervened to prevent
clashes between participants of two rallies running in parallel. The court justified the
ban, arguing that the right to life and health was more important than the right to
peaceful assembly.
12

The OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine report, 15 April 2014, paras. 52-54.

22

C.

Freedom of expression

117. The HRMMU remains concerned about the curtailment of freedom of expression,

including harassment and threats to targeting journalists working in Ukraine, mostly in
eastern regions (see section C, in Chapter V).
118. During the reporting period, a few isolated cases of obstruction to media work and

attacks on journalists were registered across Ukraine.
119. On 23 May, two journalists of “Russia Today”, who were travelling to Ukraine to cover

the elections, were denied entry at Odesa airport. The border officers reportedly forced
them to buy return tickets to Moscow and fly back, without providing any reason.
120. On 25 May and shortly after, journalists were prevented from filming the vote

counting. The HRMMU is aware of such cases having occurred in Sumy,
Dnipropetrovsk, Kremenchuk (Poltava region), Lviv, Mykolaiv, Uzhgorod and Kyiv.
To the knowledge of the HRMMU, none of these instances resulted in physical
violence or damage to equipment.
121. On 23 May, the holding “Multimedia invest group”, based in Kyiv, reported that the

accounts of the company were blocked and its building was searched by tax police.
The management sees this as pressure against its media outlets (newspaper and website
“Vesti”, TV Channel UBR and Radio Vesti) which are critical of the Government.
122. In general, the developments in eastern and southern regions of Ukraine and the large

number of casualties have generated an escalation of hate speech and tension between
the two rival sides. This is particularly obvious in social media.
D.

Minority rights

123. The HRMMU regularly meets representatives of various minorities in Ukraine. In the

reporting period no major incidents and human rights violations were reported in that
regard.
National and Ethnic minorities
124. Ethnic minorities generally speak of positive relations and atmosphere conducive to

exercising their human rights, including cultural rights. Some communities, particularly
Russian, expressed concerns with the lack of financial allocations for the needs of
ethnic minorities or bureaucratic obstructions by local authorities, for example, in
establishing additional schools, churches, newspapers, etc.
125. On 20 May, during a press-conference, Josyf Zisels, the Head of the Association of the

Jewish Organisations and Communities of Ukraine, underlined that there was no
increase in anti-Semitism in Ukraine. He noted that the number of anti-Semitic
incidents is declining since 2007. While pointing out that in the first half of 2014 more
Ukrainian Jews had migrated to Israel compared to the previous year, he attributed this
to the social-economic impact of the situation in Crimea and in the eastern regions.
Linguistic rights
126. The guarantees of using one’s mother tongue freely in private and public life without

discrimination remain high on the public agenda. The Law “On the Basics of State
Language Policy” currently in force (provides for the introduction of a “regional
language” based on ethnic composition). However, the Government has recognised
that a new language law was needed, reflecting broad consensus as well as the

23

expectations of the Russian-speaking population. There have been attempts to amend
legislation and a draft law has been developed. The latest draft law was submitted on 4
June, which proposes to provide Russian language with “official status” through
extensive usage in State institutions and public documents (see section D, Chapter IV).
127. On 30 May, the Ministry of Education amended the framework curriculum and study

plans for secondary school students of grades 5-9 for the learning of minority
languages, such as Armenian, Bulgarian, Crimean Tatar, Gagauz, Greek, German,
Hebrew, Hungarian, Korean, Moldovan, Polish, Romanian, Russian and Slovak. The
Ministry also increased significantly the number of hours prescribed for learning of a
minority language in schools where the relevant language is the working one (it is now
equal to the hours of learning Ukrainian language).
Sexual minorities
128. The HRMMU continues to receive reports from the LGBT community regarding lack

of tolerance and daily discrimination based on their sexual orientation and gender
identity, mainly bullying at school/university, difficulties in finding and/or preserving
employment especially when persons disclose their sexual orientation and gender
identity; access to health services, particularly for transgender people; and physical
attacks.
129. On 7 May, the High Specialized Court of Ukraine for Civil and Criminal Cases issued a

letter (N 10-644/0/4-14) to appellate courts, explicitly prohibiting discrimination in
employment on the basis of sexual orientation. The Court stressed that, when
considering cases of labour discrimination, it is important to take into consideration the
existing anti-discrimination law, which prohibits discrimination on any basis.
E.

Political rights

Human rights in the electoral process
130. On 25 May, the population of Ukraine voted to elect a new President among 21

candidates. On 3 June, the Central Election Commission (CEC) confirmed that Mr.
Petro Poroshenko had won with 54.7% of the vote.
131. The elections took place in a challenging political, economic and, in particular, security

environment, due to continued unrest and violence in the east of Ukraine, where armed
groups control some areas, and the Government has been conducting security
operations. This situation affected the general human rights situation and seriously
impacted the election environment, also obstructing meaningful observation.
132. Notwithstanding, elections were characterised by a 60% voter turnout and the clear

resolve of the authorities to hold elections in line with international commitments and
with a respect for fundamental freedoms in the vast majority of the country. The voting
and counting process were transparent, despite large queues of voters at polling stations
in some parts of the country.
133. Despite efforts of the election administration to ensure voting throughout the country,

polling did not take place in 10 of the 12 election districts in Luhansk region and 14 of
the 22 election districts in Donetsk region. This was due to illegal activities by armed
groups before, and on, the election day, including death threats and intimidation of
election officials, seizure and destruction of polling materials, as well as the
impossibility to distribute ballots to polling stations due to the general insecurity caused
24

by these groups (see Chapter V). The majority of Ukrainian citizens resident in these
regions were thus deprived of the right to vote. Elsewhere, a few isolated attempts to
disrupt voting were reported.
134. The HRMMU followed the participation of Crimean residents in the Presidential

elections. Simplified registration procedures were put in place to ensure that residents
of Crimea and persons who resettled from Crimea to other regions could take part in
the elections. According to the CEC, 6,000 Crimean residents voted on 25 May.
Political parties/ Freedom of association
135. On 7 May, several political parties were allegedly banned in Luhansk region by a

decision of the “people’s council”, including Batkivchyna, Udar, Svoboda and Oleg
Lyashko’s Radical Party, as well as Right Sector. It also inferred “extended powers” on
Valeriy Bolotov, the self-proclaimed “people’s governor”.
136. On 13 May, the Kyiv District Administrative Court banned the party Russian Bloc

based on the fact that the party leaders had called for the overthrow of the constitutional
order and violations of the territorial integrity of the country.13
137. It appears that the Communist Party of Ukraine is coming under increasing pressure.

On 7 May, the Communist faction of the Parliament was expelled from a closed-door
parliamentary hearing, which was denounced by the Party of Regions faction,
allegedly, because of the “separatist” statements by its head, Petro Symonenko. The
hearing was reportedly about the security operations in the east. Party of the Regions
pointed out that information on these security operations should be made public.
138. On 18 May, former acting President Turchynov called on the Ministry of Justice to

review documents gathered by the law enforcement bodies relating to the alleged illegal
and unconstitutional activities of the Communist Party of Ukraine aimed at violating
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country, undermining State security and
illegal seizure of State power. On 19 May, the Ministry of Justice sent a request to the
General Prosecutor’s Office and the SBU to investigate possible crimes by the
leadership of the Communist Party of Ukraine.
F.

Internally displaced persons

139. As of 6 June, the departments of social protection in the Ukrainian regions had

identified over 12,70014 internally displaced persons (IDPs)15. However, the actual
number of people who have fled the violence and fighting in the regions of Donetsk
and Luhansk is believed to be higher and increasing daily. According to various
estimates, around 64% are women; many are with children, including infants. The IDPs
live dispersed across the entire territory, with significant concentrations in Kyiv and
Lviv.

13

On 15 April, the Ministry of Justice filed a lawsuit to prohibit the activities of the political parties Russian
Bloc and Russian Unity in Ukraine. The activity of Russian Unity was banned on 30 April. According to
Ukrainian law, a court can ban the activities of a political party upon a request filed by the Ministry of Justice.
14
UNHCR estimated that, as of 16 June, there were 34,336 IDPs in Ukraine, with 15,200 located in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions.
15
According to the Russian Federation Federal Migration Service, as of 6 June 2014, 837 persons had applied
and were granted refugee status; and 3,750 persons had applied and were granted Temporary Asylum.
Approximately 15% were minors under the age of 18. These figures do not include people from Crimea.

25

140. People have left Crimea for different reasons. The majority have economic,

professional or family ties within Ukraine and do not wish to acquire Russian
citizenship, which many feel compelled to do in order to continue a normal life in
Crimea. Some Crimean Tatars fear limitations to their religious and cultural expression.
Activists and journalists have been exposed to, or fear, harassment.
141. The main difficulties the IDPs from Crimea continue to face are: lack of temporary and

permanent housing; access to social allocations, medical and educational services;
access to bank accounts / deposits; possibility to continue entrepreneurship activity, and
employment opportunities.
142. Despite efforts made, some of these issues, particularly housing, are very difficult to

resolve without systemic changes and involvement of the Government. The HRMMU
has been made aware of some instances when IDPs had to return to Crimea, since their
basic needs could not be met in Ukraine.
143. Displacement from the Donetsk and Luhansk regions started in the days leading up to

the “referendum” held in both regions on 11 May. People have been trying to leave the
violence affected areas, particularly Slovyansk and Kramatorsk, after witnessing
violence on the streets. Armed groups and increasing criminality have generated fear.
144. The HRMMU interviewed several IDPs from the eastern regions, who reported that

apart from random violence, there were targeted attacks and intimidation of activists
and increasingly of “ordinary” residents, known for their “Pro-Ukrainian” stance. Local
NGOs confirmed that while seizing administrative buildings, armed groups obtained
access to personal data of activists who participated in rallies. The latter and their
families were reportedly being threatened and harassed.
145. One of the few interviewed activists reported being threatened and having to stay in a

friend’s house for nine days without food, as her own apartment was under
surveillance. Then other activists helped her escape and settle in another town. She has
no information about her family and suffers from insomnia and anxiety attacks.
146. Political activists and journalists began to feel pressure from the armed groups who

were consolidating their position in the region. After the “referendum” and with the
intensification of violence, other residents of the region have started leaving their
homes in areas affected by violence due to the illegal activities of armed groups and the
security operations, particularly in the areas of Slovyansk and Kramatorsk. Many
remain within the eastern regions in rural areas, as IDPs have been reporting
harassment at checkpoints if they were perceived to be leaving the region to seek
protection.
147. The majority of international humanitarian actors, due to security reasons, are unable to

access persons displaced within the Donetsk and Luhansk regions and thus only some
very limited assistance has been provided. IDPs, who leave the eastern regions, have
generally maintained a low profile, fearing retribution against their relatives who have
remained at home.
148. There are considerable gaps in the State’s ability to protect IDPs. The central

authorities have not issued formal instructions regarding how to register and assist
persons displaced from Donetsk and Luhansk regions, leading to different practices
across the country. The system for registering the IDPs is rudimentary, so the number
and profile of IDPs and their needs remain largely invisible. As a result, the actual
number of displaced persons is difficult to estimate.

26

149. Regional authorities are waiting for instructions on funding allocations for IDPs from

the Luhansk and Donetsk regions. Temporary accommodation, while theoretically
available, cannot be paid for and is thus rationed in many regions. Several
administrative matters remain unresolved, hindering IDPs’ ability to resume a normal
life: many cannot obtain temporary residence registration; register business activities;
or in the case of IDPs from Crimea, who have not registered on the mainland, they may
find that they cannot access their personal savings in bank accounts in Crimea.
150. IDPs from the Donetsk and Luhansk regions describe leaving the region with few

personal belongings in order to disguise the purpose of their departure. Many report
having witnessed violence and experiencing feelings of fear. In dozens of interviews
with UNHCR, IDPs have reported significant deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in the areas affected by violence and the security operations. They are mostly
concerned about security: people report staying in cellars to keep away from the
fighting, facing harassment at checkpoints and fearing the increasingly common
abductions, threats and extortion. They have been reporting to UNHCR and the
HRMMU about the serious social and economic impact of the conflict. Families have
run out of money since jobs are lost, banks closed and pensions unpaid. Public utilities
like electricity and water work only intermittently. Thus, the IDPs from the eastern
regions are particularly vulnerable. There are multiple reports that thousands of people
are eager to escape the areas affected by violence and the security operations as soon as
they can safely move.
151. Many IDPs have exhausted their resources. Having originally been hosted by friends,

family or even generous strangers identified through social networks, they find
themselves under pressure to move out of these temporary housing arrangements, as
conditions are overcrowded and hospitality reaches its limits. Without sufficient
support to find jobs and housing, IDPs report increasing levels of frustration and
humanitarian needs. Increasingly, IDPs are trying to self-organise into NGOs to help
each other, as illustrated by Crimea SOS, Vostok SOS, the Unified Coordination Centre
of Donbas. On 23 May, the HRMMU attended the first all-Ukrainian meeting
organized by an initiative group of IDPs from Crimea to bring the problems faced by
IDPs to the attention of the Government and local authorities so as to develop joint
solutions.

V.

PARTICULAR HUMAN RIGHTS CHALLENGES IN THE EAST
A.

Impact of the security situation on human rights

Deterioration of the security situation
152. The reporting period was marked by a significant deterioration in the security situation

in eastern Ukraine. The HRMMU received credible reports illustrating an escalation of
abductions, arbitrary detentions, ill-treatment, looting, as well as the occupation of
public and administration buildings (with certain fluctuations, as some buildings are
recovered by the Ukrainian military and law enforcement bodies, and some then again
re-seized by armed groups). The period since the Presidential elections can be
characterized by an increase of fighting in eastern Ukraine, with fluctuations in
intensity.

27

153. The regularity and intensification of fighting between the armed groups and Ukrainian

armed forces raises serious human rights concerns, including but not limited to: the fate
of persons not involved in the fighting, especially children; the necessity and
proportionality of the use of force; and the large-scale destructions, which only add to
the social and economic hardship and a general lack of respect for international
humanitarian law, when and where applicable to the fighting.
154. Violence and lawlessness have spread in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. Having

gained access to deposits of weapons, including from the SBU building, the armed
groups increasingly started spreading violence. Abductions of persons not involved in
any fighting and related acts of arbitrary detentions, looting, and killings of persons not
involved in any fighting and other activities in violation of international law have been
carried out by the armed groups. Moreover there are reports of victims being subjected
to degrading treatment, random shooting and provocations, particularly near the
Ukrainian-Russian border. Increasingly, attacks target ordinary people, who take no
part in the fighting.
155. The security operations by the Government, with military and National Guard forces

particularly concentrated around the town of Slovyansk, are present in the regions of
Donetsk and Luhansk. With their superior manpower and military hardware, the
Ukrainian armed forces have controlled access to the cities through multiple layers of
check-points.
156. Skirmishes between armed groups and the Ukrainian military also saw the inclusion of

various territorial defence battalions under the command of the MoI.
157. The HRMMU observed an increasing presence of armed men on trucks and armoured

vehicles moving around the city of Donetsk during daylight. For the first time, the
HRMMU team members were stopped as they drove in their vehicle through Donetsk
by armed persons who demanded to see their identity.
158. In the two regions, the situation has been made complex as some of the armed groups

operating in the regions have reportedly slipped out of the control and influence of the
self-proclaimed republics and their leaders. Examples of this can reportedly be found
with the armed groups in the area surrounding the town of Horlivka16 in the Donetsk
region, and the armed groups operating in the border area of the Luhansk region near
the border with the Russian Federation. Moreover, on the “official” “Donetsk People’s
Republic” media outlet “Anna Info News”, the Slovyansk commander “Strelkov” Igor
Girkin referred to “criminal groups” operating in the regions and that the “Donetsk
People’s Republic” was lacking volunteers.
159. Regardless of the veracity of this information, the proliferation of armed groups has

clearly exacerbated threats to the security of the population, posing a further challenge
in ensuring the rule of law and accountability for the numerous illegal acts committed.
The “Donetsk People’s Republic” has reported the presence among them of citizens of
the Russian Federation, including from Chechnya and other republics in the North
Caucasus. A particular call for women to join the armed groups was made on 17 May
through a video released with Igor Girkin “Strelkov”, urging women of the Donetsk
region to enlist in combat units.

16

Now reportedly under the control of an armed group led by Igor Bezler.

28

“Referendum” on “self-rule” held in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions on 11 May
160. On 11 May, a “referendum” on “self-rule” that was neither in accordance with the

Constitution of Ukraine nor with effect under international law, took place in the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. The following question was asked: “Do you support the act of selfrule of the People’s Republic of Donetsk / People’s Republic of Luhansk?” The
Government of Ukraine deemed the “referendum” illegal.
161. Reports suggest that there were a limited number of polling stations for the two regions.

The official voter registration of the Central Election Commission was not used as a basis
for the vote. Media outlets and journalists observing the “referendum” reported a number
of violations (e.g. one person filling out several ballots; multiple voting; voting without
documentation).
162. In the aftermath of the “referendum” of 11 May, the level of violence by armed groups

intensified. At the same time, a new “government” was formed, and Alexander Borodai, a
Russian citizen, nominated as “prime minister” of the “Donetsk People’s Republic”. A call
was made for Ukrainian troops to leave the region.
Casualties due to the escalation in intensity of fighting as Government aims to gain
control of the territory
165. Reports illustrate that over the past month, attacks and fighting have been intensifying

with an increased number of casualties. Fighting remained concentrated in the northern
part of the Donetsk region and the border areas and south of the Luhansk region. In the
Kharkiv region, one Ukrainian serviceman was killed in an ambush, near the city of
Izyum, on the border with the Donetsk region, which serves as a basis for the security
operations of the Ukrainian forces.
166. On 3 June, the Prosecutor General Oleg Mahnіtsky announced that 181 people had been

killed since the start of the Government’s security operations on 14 April to regain control
of the eastern regions. Of those killed, 59 were Ukrainian soldiers; the others were
reported to be residents. 293 were wounded as a result of these security operations in the
Donetsk and Luhansk Regions. This is a considerable increase since 14 May, when the
Prosecutor General had announced 68 killed (servicemen and residents).
167. The HRMMU is trying to verify these allegations and to obtain disaggregated data on the

victims and perpetrators. This is, however, difficult to obtain due to either a lack of, or
contradictory, information.
168. On 13 May, a Ukrainian military unit was ambushed near Kramatorsk, killing seven

Ukrainian soldiers. On 22 May, 17 Ukrainian servicemen were killed and 31 injured near
Volnovakha (south of Donetsk); that same day another soldier was killed and two others
injured in an attack by armed men on a convoy of military vehicles near Rubizhne in the
Luhansk region. On 23 May, the territorial defence battalion “Donbas” was ambushed and
attacked by an armed group, reportedly controlled by Igor Bezler, near the town of
Horlivka close to Donetsk. Nine soldiers were wounded and detained by Bezler’s group;
one was reportedly killed. On 29 May, a Ukrainian military helicopter was shot down near
Slovyansk, which killed 12 service personnel who were on board, including a General.
169. On 26 May, fighting broke out for control of the Donetsk airport between the armed

groups and the Ukrainian military. Ukrainian military planes and helicopters were used
against the armed groups who eventually conceded control. The airport terminal and the
runway were damaged as a result of aerial bombing. According to the Interior Minister,
there were no losses within the Ukrainian military but according to various sources, the

29

armed groups suffered over 50 casualties, of these at least 31 volunteers were reportedly
from the Russian Federation, including from Chechnya and other republics in the Northern
Caucasus. Out of these casualties, 30 bodies of those fighting with the armed groups have
not been recovered.
170. During the fighting around Donetsk airport on 26 May, the Mayor called on the population

not to leave their apartments unless absolutely necessary. Notwithstanding, residents did
become victims. A woman was killed by a shell at a bus stop. A man was killed as a result
of an incoming explosion near the Children's Hospital, with a further six people wounded,
including a seven-year-old boy who was at home. A criminal case was opened under
Article 258, Part 3 of the Criminal Code of Ukraine (“Terrorist act that led to the death of
a person”).
171. On 2 June, an explosion of an unknown nature took place at the occupied building of

Luhansk Regional State Administration. According to various accounts, it was either a
failed attempt by the local armed groups to hit a Ukrainian fighter plane, or the
bombardment of the occupied building by a Ukrainian plane. Seven people in, and around,
the occupied building were reported killed as a result of the shelling, including the
“minister of health” of the “Luhansk People’s Republic”, Nataliya Arkhipova.
172. The Ukrainian National Guard took control of the town of Krasnyi Liman (20 km North-

West of Slovyansk) after fierce fighting on 3 June. The town hospital was badly damaged
reportedly by shelling and most patients were evacuated to the basement of the hospital.
Two civilians were killed. The chief surgeon of the hospital was gravely wounded, and
died on 4 June.
173. IDPs from Slovyansk have described to the HRMMU the situation they have faced for the

past weeks. They claim that the Ukrainian air force was shelling the city and bombed a
kindergarten. They also said that for two months they did not receive any social benefits.
Some of them left male members behind, and/or their parents or grandparents. A hotline at
the disposal of IDPs or people who are considering leaving the areas affected by fighting
is run by a few Red Cross activists. Transport of people who come to the check points is
mostly organized by “Auto-Maidan” activists. Reception centres for arriving IDPs
organised the initial assistance they received, including psycho-social.
Widening protection gap and erosion of the rule of law
174. With the presence of armed groups in seized and occupied government buildings, and

checkpoints, which shift hands as they are taken over by armed groups or the Ukrainian
security and law enforcement units involved in the security operations, the human rights of
the residents of the northern part of Donetsk region and parts of the Luhansk region are
threatened.
175. With the demise of security, the rule of law and governance, the protection gap is

widening. Armed groups physically occupy key public and administrative buildings in
many cities and towns of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, and have declared virtual
“independence”. However, they are not undertaking any governing responsibilities. In
addition, the atmosphere of fear and intimidation, particularly following the abductions
and killing of town councillors and public civil servants, prevent many local officials from
going to work.
176. Of particular concern is the continued erosion of the rule of law and the limited capacity of

the Government to protect residents from the ever increasing acts of violence. Many of the
attacks and abductions by armed groups target journalists, elected representatives and civil

30

society activists. The number of armed robberies and shootings of residents has also been
increasing.
177. The difficulty of providing public services impacts the daily life of residents of the

regions, including the disruption of public transport (airports remain closed and rail
services are disrupted); numerous checkpoints on the roads; lack of access to cash through
banks; and earlier reports of schools and kindergartens being repeatedly closed before the
summer holidays began in early June. Regional governments have endeavoured to make
the necessary arrangements so that local residents are able to carry on with their daily
lives. While this remains possible in the larger cities of Donetsk and Luhansk, and the less
affected southern part of the Donetsk region, this is a challenge in the northern part of the
Donetsk region. As a consequence, there are reportedly increased numbers of people
leaving the area, in particular in the areas of Slovyansk; primarily women with children
(see section B, Chapter V).
178. In the main cities, there were a few rallies supporting or opposing the self-proclaimed

republics. On 13 May, hundreds of local residents of the Luhansk region addressed a
petition to the Government of Ukraine, stating that they did not recognise the results of the
“referendum", and demanding more proactive and effective action to free the region from
“terrorists who do not allow us to live in peace” and to pay more attention to the concerns
of the population.
179. According to NGOs, the week preceding the “referendum” of 11 May, over 500

apartments were reportedly put up for sale in Donetsk in just a few days as people were
seeking means to leave. Since then, an average of 20 families leave the region every day.
Presidential elections
180. After the “referendum”, representatives of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” openly

declared their intention to obstruct the 25 May Presidential election. Physical attempts to
disrupt the election in these two regions were stepped up, with reports of attacks against
electoral commissions. As a result, the CEC stated that in 24 districts of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions the election was obstructed due to illegal acts by armed groups and
supporters of the self-proclaimed “People’s Republics”. According to official CEC
figures, 82 % of the voters in the Donetsk region, and 88 % of voters in Luhansk region
were thus deprived of their right to vote. Elections of Mayors due to take place in
Antratsyt, Lisichansk and Severodonetsk in the Luhansk region also had to be cancelled
due to such illegal activities.
181. There was a similar pattern of attacks on District Election Commissions (DEC) and

Precinct Election Commissions (PEC). An armed group of between five to fifteen people
representing the “Donetsk People’s Republic” would come to a Commission or polling
station. Claiming that the Presidential election was illegal, they would seize office
equipment and DEC/PEC protocols and stamps. Generally, they would detain the head of
the commission for several hours or, in some cases for several days, subjecting individuals
to interrogation and reportedly at times ill-treatment and torture.
182. On 13 May, representatives of the “Donetsk People's Republic” reportedly entered a DEC

in Horlivka, demanding documents and office equipment and requesting that the staff
leave the premises. The electoral staff refused to obey this. Two hours later the men
returned, armed with baseball bats. The staff left, grabbing the most important documents
and official stamps. A similar incident occurred in a DEC in Starobeshevo (Luhansk
region) on 14 May. The DEC members were ordered to leave the building with threats to
their families, should they return.

31

183. On 7 May, unknown groups of people broke into a DEC in Kuybyshevskiy district, seizing

equipment containing electoral information. Upon arrival at the scene, the police did not
intervene. Other examples of attacks by armed groups on DECs and TECs include
incidents in Artemivsk, Donetsk and Metalist (near Amrosiyivka) on 20, 21 and 25 May.
184. Election commission members also faced attacks, with many abducted and detained. On 9

May, an armed group abducted a member of the DEC in Kramatorsk. He was taken to the
occupied City Council and released after being interrogated. On 20 May, a member of the
PEC in Mariupol was detained by armed persons, beaten up and then released.
185. Skirmishes around the electoral process included an incident on 25 May, when a group of

armed people of the “Luhansk People’s Republic” reportedly attacked and stole the ballots
from the PEC in Novoaydarsk in the Luhansk region. Ukrainian soldiers pursued the
armed group. A violent confrontation took place, during which two members of the armed
group were reportedly killed and three Ukrainian army servicemen were allegedly
wounded. 14 people were subsequently detained by the Ukrainian army. Other accounts
claim that three people were injured and one person was killed.
186. On the election day, five election commission members from Donetsk were detained by

armed persons and taken to the SBU building. Following an intervention by the HRMMU
with representatives of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” at the occupied SBU building,
they were released the next day.
187. Such attacks prevented DECs and PECs to continue their preparations for the Presidential

election, which led to widespread limitations to exercise of the right to vote in eastern
Ukraine, notably in the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk.
188. On 26 May, the “speaker” of the “Donetsk People’s Republic”, Denis Pushylin,

announced that a visit of the newly-elected President Petro Poroshenko to the Donbas
would “heat up” the situation in the Donetsk region, and that dialogue was possible only
through mediation by the Russian Federation. According to him, the “Donetsk People’s
Republic” had proclaimed “martial law” on “its” territory and that a curfew might be
imposed in certain areas.
B.

Right to life, liberty and security

189. On 9 May, as reported by the MoI, some 60 men armed with automatic weapons stormed

and seized the Mariupol Department of the MoI. The security operations which involved
the National Guard, the special unit “Azov”, the special unit “Dnepr” and the armed forces
of Ukraine, tried to take back the building. As a result, nine people were killed and many
were wounded, primarily residents.
190. Unidentified armed persons reportedly started firing from the second floor of the building,

and the Ukrainian forces fired back. Reportedly, the National Guard servicemen who were
outside started firing at the building with machine guns and rocket propelled grenades. As
a result, a fire started in the building. The fire brigade arrived. Those who were inside
started running out the building and dispersing in the city.
191. In the early afternoon, while retreating, the special unit “Azov” came across local “Pro-

Russian” demonstrators who reportedly tried to stop them. Members of the special unit
“Azov” reportedly fired warning shots, first into the air, and then at people’s legs. The
HRMMU is verifying this information.

32

192. After the armed forces left the military base in Mariupol, it was looted by “Pro-Russian”

activists, who reportedly took an unknown number of weapons, ammunitions and two
armoured vehicles. The Ukrainian security and law enforcement forces were relocated
outside the city in an effort to decrease tensions, and for the safety of residents.
193. According to the MoI, 20 armed persons were killed and four captured; while the Public

Health Department of the Donetsk Regional State Administration asserts that three
persons were killed. The Chief of the Traffic Police was confirmed killed; and the Chief of
Police was abducted and illegally detained. On his release on 11 May, confirmed by the
MoI, he was found to have multiple injuries. The HRMMU is trying to verify this
information.
194. Human rights activists from the NGO Memorial who visited Mariupol on 11 May reported

finding 15 wounded men at Mariupol City Clinic Hospital № 1. Six police officers were
hospitalised and the first civilian victims were brought later to the hospital. The Mariupol
Emergency Hospital received 10 wounded persons, of whom one (a police officer) died.
15 wounded people were brought to Mariupol City Clinic Hospital № 2. As reported to
the HRMMU by the human rights defenders, the majority of those wounded were not
involved in the fighting.
195. The HRMMU continues to highlight the need for a prompt and comprehensive

investigation into these events.
Abduction and detentions
196. In the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk, a reported escalation of violence and violations of

international law (abductions and acts of arbitrary detention targeting persons not involved
in the fighting, intimidation and harassment, torture and killings) by armed groups
illustrated the growing erosion of law and order. The HRMMU is increasingly concerned
about guarantees for the protection of human rights of the general population. According
to the MoI, from April to 7 June 2014, armed groups in the eastern regions abducted 387
people, among them 39 journalists.
197. Below are some of the many cases reported to the HRMMU during the period covered by

the present report. The HRMMU is keeping track of reports of abductions and acts of
arbitrary detention targeting persons not involved in the fighting, intimidation and
harassment, torture and killings in eastern Ukraine. It is trying to verify such reports
through direct contacts with the victims and/or relatives or through other reliable sources.
From its own records, the HRMMU is aware of 222 cases of abductions and detentions by
armed groups since 13 April. Of these, 4 were killed; 137 released; and 81 remained
detained as of 7 June.
198. The pattern of abductions consists of groups of armed men taking people away and

detaining them in one of the buildings they occupy on the grounds that they are members
of the Right Sector and “spies”. Some are released after a few hours, some after a few
days, and there are numerous accounts of allegations of ill-treatment and torture.
199. According to local activists from Kramatorsk, on 9 May, about 40 residents of the city

were abducted by the “Donetsk People’s Republic”. On 10 May, three “Pro-Ukrainian”
female activists not involved in any fighting were abducted and detained by armed persons
in Kramatorsk. One of them was released the next day after being reportedly subjected to
torture during interrogation. She was subsequently hospitalised in Slovyansk, suffering
from broken ribs, a pierced liver, a head injury and multiple bruises. The other two women
were released on 13 May and placed under so-called “house arrest”, reportedly prohibited
from leaving Kramatorsk.
33

200. On 8 May, a woman went to Slovyansk to try to secure the release of her son detained by

the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and was reportedly abducted by the same armed persons.
She has cancer and was undergoing chemotherapy. The whereabouts of a female
interpreter was unknown from 4 to 18 May. Upon her release, she reported having been
detained by armed groups in Donetsk and to having being subjected to ill-treatment and
sexual assault.
201. On 26 May, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) lost contact in the town of

Antrazyt, with one of its Donetsk-based teams, consisting of four persons. On 29 May,
contact was lost with another team of four in the Luhansk region. As of 7 June, the eight
remained detained and their whereabouts unknown. 11 other OSCE SMM members were
stopped on 28 May for a few hours at a checkpoint in Mariynka (Donetsk region) before
being able to return safely to Donetsk.
202. On 25 May, two officers of the SBU were reportedly detained by the “Luhansk People’s

Republic” while attempting to negotiate the release of their colleagues who were being
detained. Their current location remains unknown. On 2 June, three police officers of the
Amvrosievka District Department of the MoI were reportedly abducted; their whereabouts
remain unknown although there are reports they might be detained by armed groups in
Horlivka. Two senior police officers went to Horlivka to negotiate their release. They have
not returned and their whereabouts is also unknown.
203. The HRMMU was involved in efforts to negotiate the release of individuals detained by

the armed groups under the control of the “Donetsk People’s Republic and the “Luhansk
People’s Republic”. Following repeated interventions, several civic activists and members
of district election commissions were released from the SBU building in Donetsk on 27
May. During the night of 29-30 May, 20 civilians detained in the SBU building were
released following discussions between the HRMMU and representatives of the “Donetsk
People’s Republic”.
204. The HRMMU appealed to the leadership of the “Luhansk People’s Republic” on 26 May

for the release of two detained journalists at the occupied building of the SBU in Luhansk.
A similar release took place of a third journalist. They were all detained by armed groups
for having covered the elections in the Donetsk region. While in detention, two of the
journalists were badly beaten, and were hospitalised upon their release.
205. The emergence of ransom demands is a worrisome trend, following abductions of people

from their homes and in some cases accompanied by looting and stealing of valuables,
including cars. For example, on 9-10 May, an armed group together with police officers
allegedly abducted the parents of a local activist from “Svoboda”, from their home in the
village Khanzhenkovo (near Makyivka, Donetsk region). On 10 May, the home of an
activist from Kramatorsk was allegedly attacked and items stolen by armed persons.
Applicable international law prohibits the taking of hostages for purposes of demanding
ransom or political concessions, regardless of whether the victims are of the general
population or involved in the fighting.
206. On 26 May, three deputy prosecutors were abducted by armed men, but two were

immediately released. The third was subsequently exchanged for three supporters of the
“Donetsk People’s Republic” who were being detained in the Lukyanovskoe pre-trial
detention centre in Kyiv. That same day, a traffic police officer was taken hostage by an
armed group of “Cossacks” in Antratsyt in Luhansk region. The family was asked for a
ransom of one million UAH (approximately 80,000 USD).

34

207. Although most of the persons detained are activists, journalists, and town councillors,

NGOs in Donetsk have highlighted to the HRMMU a growing pattern of the systematic
persecution against civil society. According to them, fear is spreading in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, with an increasing number of acts of intimidation and violence by armed
groups, targeting “ordinary” people who support Ukrainian unity or who openly oppose
the either of the two “people’s republics”.
208. Among cases brought to the attention of the HRMMU, on 14 May, four armed men in

camouflage reportedly abducted the principal of a school in Luhansk from the school
premises. Allegedly, she had opposed holding the “referendum” on the school premises.
She was released a few hours later, but refused to speak about the incident. The same day
in Kramatorsk, armed men came to the apartment of an employee and reportedly abducted
him. Reportedly they were looking for his 16-year old son, allegedly because of his active
“Pro-Ukrainian” position, including in the social media. Since the son was not to be found,
they took the father to the occupied building of the Kramatorsk City Council where he was
beaten. Allegedly, they eventually found the son and took him to the city council. Both
were released a few hours later, and the whole family left the region the same day.
Killings
209. Increasingly residents have been killed by armed groups. On 8 May, the burned body of

Valeriy Salo, a farmer and head of a local cultural organization known as a “Pro-Maidan”
activist, was found a day after he had been abducted by armed persons from his village.
There have also been several reports of killings at checkpoints held by armed groups. That
same day, an Orthodox priest was shot dead at a checkpoint near his hometown of
Druzhivka, and a couple was also shot dead in their car at a checkpoint in the Luhansk
region. Their daughter survived with head injuries. In the same region, on 23 May, a
woman who allegedly did not stop at a checkpoint died when heavy gun fire was opened
at her car.
210. The HRMMU is also concerned about reports of “summary executions” by representatives

of the “Donetsk People’s Republic”. On 18 May, in a village near Slovyansk an elderly
farmer was accused of bringing food to the Ukrainian forces, taken out of his house into
the yard, where according to witnesses a “sentence” was read in the name of the “Donetsk
People’s Republic” and shot dead, in front of his family and neighbours. Reportedly, on
26 May, by order of Igor Strelkov, Dmytro Slavov (“commander of a company of the
people’s militia”) and Mykola Lukyanov (“commander of a platoon of the militia of
”Donetsk People’s Republic”) were “executed” in Slovyansk, after they were “sentenced”
for “looting, armed robbery, kidnapping and abandoning the battle field”. The order,
which was circulated widely and posted in the streets in Slovyansk, referred to a decree of
the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the USSR of 22 June 1941 as the basis for the
execution.
Torture
211. The HRMMU has been following cases of individuals who have been abducted and

detained by armed groups in eastern Ukraine. Several interviews conducted with persons
who were abducted provide vivid accounts of human rights abuses committed by
representatives of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and the “Luhansk People’s Republic”,
including beatings, psychological torture and mock executions. There are instances of
relatives of detained persons, including women and children, having been threatened and
terrorised. Witnesses also mention having seen supporters of the “Donetsk People’s

35

Republic” and “Luhansk People’s Republic” being detained and subjected to harsh
punishment for looting or insubordination.
212. Among the numerous cases reported to the HRMMU, a journalist from Lutsk who was

abducted by armed groups in Donetsk on 25 April, stated that during 23 days of his
detention, he suffered from permanent lack of drinking water. He was reportedly tortured
with electric shocks, beaten repeatedly over the head with a heavy book, and his captors
reportedly tried to cut off one of his fingers.
213. An activist of “Batkivschyna”, abducted on 22 May and detained by supporters of the

“Donetsk People’s Republic” in Donetsk, reported being subjected to torture and forced
labour while in detention. He stated that he only received food twice in the five days he
was detained. He was interrogated about affiliation with the “Right Sector”, with
“Euromaidan”, and trips to Kyiv. During one of the interrogations he was reportedly
subjected to a mock execution.
214. Three activists of a local human rights NGO were detained in Donetsk on 27 May and

released on 1 June. They were taken to the occupied building of the Makiyivka
Department of Organized Crime Control, and interrogated on a daily basis, accused of
being affiliated to the “Right Sector” and the Ukrainian military. Both of them allege
having been tortured.
Enforced disappearances
215. The HRMMU has received credible reports of individuals being detained in conditions

that amount to enforced disappearance, and has a list of 11 such cases.
216. On 10 May, units of the Ukrainian armed forces allegedly detained a streamer, who was

covering the activities of armed groups, in particular, the attacks on the government
buildings in Donetsk region. The HRMMU filed a request to the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs (MFA), asking about the current location of the individual. On 15 May, the
HRMMU was informed by the MFA that a criminal case was opened by the MoI underhe
Article 115 (Murder) of the Criminal Code.
217. In an earlier case of concern, working with the National Preventive Mechanism (NPM),

the HRMMU was able to identify the location of an individual whose whereabouts had
been unknown for nine days. The location of an activist of the “Donetsk People’s
Republic” was identified on 26 May, after he had been allegedly detained by the National
Guard on 17 April in the area of Amvrosiyivka. After enquiries made by the NPM, the
activist was located in the pre-trial detention centre in Dnipropetrovsk. It remains
unknown who exactly arrested the activist and why access was not granted to him for nine
days. The NPM confirmed that he had no health complaints, besides having "a few minor
bruises" on his body. It is checking on access to legal counsel for him. It is also unclear
whether the activist has been officially charged.
218. This has put in motion a good practice for partnership with the NPM on such cases, which

was key in drawing attention to the case of the enforced disappearance for six days of two
LifeNews journalists, Oleg Sidyakin and Marat Saychenko. Both were detained on 18
May near Kramatorsk during a raid by Ukrainian forces against armed groups. The
whereabouts of the two journalists was unknown until their release on the evening of 24
May, when they were flown to Moscow via Grozny. All attempts by their lawyers to be in
contact with them, and gain some access to the two individuals, had failed. The HRMMU
worked with the lawyers of the two journalists, and with others including the
Ombudsperson, the NPM and the MFA. Through these institutions, requests were made on
the case to the General Prosecutor, MoI and SBU. Upon their release, the journalists
36

asserted that they were beaten in the first two days of their detention, initially held in a
hole, blindfolded with hands tied, and then transferred to Kyiv. For the period from 18
May to 24 May, the journalists were effectively held in conditions that amounted to
enforced disappearance.
219. The HRMMU was also looking into the detention conditions of supporters of the

“Donetsk People’s Republic” and “Luhansk People’s Republic” detained by the Ukrainian
forces during the security operations. Regular visits to places of detention take place,
including in Kyiv when persons arrested have been transferred to detention facilities in the
capital. The HRMMU actively cooperates with the Ombudsperson and the NPM to make
sure the human rights of detained persons are upheld, including from the point of view of
access to medication and to the services of a lawyer.
Children
220. The HRMMU is particularly concerned about the impact of the situation in eastern

Ukraine - especially in the area between Donetsk and Slovyansk - on the human rights of
women, and the most vulnerable persons - children and persons with disabilities, including
those in institutional care, older persons, and those needing medical assistance.
221. According to a rapid psychological assessment of 204 children conducted by the

UNICEF17 in four cities of the region of Donetsk from 15 to 22 May, nearly every second
child experienced fear, anger, sadness or problems with sleep. Other behavioural changes
were also observed in a number of children.
222. According to Donetsk Regional State Administration, in the period between 9 – 30 May,

seven children had been wounded as a result of the illegal activities of the armed groups.
According to credible reports received by the HRMMU, 14 children from the children’s
institution in Slovyansk have been evacuated from the city. An NGO in Kharkiv expressed
concern that there were no evacuation plans for persons with disabilities living in closed
institutions. On 7 June, the Ministry of Social Policy informed the HRMMU that out of
1,494 children who are in closed institutions (children’s institutions, shelters, and so forth)
in Donetsk region, 663 have been evacuated; in Luhansk region out of 760 children, 464
have been evacuated.
223. As fighting intensifies and with the end of the school year on 30 May, parents are

reportedly increasingly looking for ways to evacuate their children to safety. There is
information that a group of children from Slovyansk has arrived in Crimea and most
recently on 6 June to Odesa. On 30 May, various media outlets informed that a group of
148 children from Slovyansk was taken to a summer camp in Crimea. There were also
reports that on 31 May, a group of 21 children crossed into the Russian Federation on foot,
after having to disembark from their bus at the border. This information cannot be verified
by the HRMMU.
C.

Freedom of expression

224. Journalists’ safety continues to be a serious issue in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions due

to fighting between the Government’s security forces and armed groups. On 24 May, an
Italian photojournalist, Andrea Rocchelli, and his interpreter, Andrey Mironov, Russian
citizen, were killed under mortar fire, while covering fighting between government forces
and armed groups in Andreyevka near Slovyansk, Donetsk region. On 9 May, it was
17

UNICEF, Rapid Psychosocial Assessment of Children in Donetsk Oblast, 2014.

37

reported that a freelance cameraman of the video agency RUPTLY, which is part of the
TV channel Russia Today, was wounded while filming events in Mariupol. Reportedly, he
received necessary medical treatment and is in satisfactory condition.
225. The working environment for journalists has become increasingly dangerous, with the

threat of abduction and illegal detention by armed groups. On 7 May, it was reported that
armed groups in Luhansk offered a reward of USD 2,000-10,000 for each detained
journalist. The HRMMU continues to closely monitor cases of detentions of journalists in
Donetsk and Luhansk regions. Although all but one of the journalists abducted and known
to the HRMMU before 6 May (cut-off date of the previous report) have been released, the
HRMMU is aware of new cases abducted after that date. The HRMMU interviewed many
of the released journalists, who reported ill-treatment, beatings, and sexual harassment (of
women). They also confirmed the fact that other detainees were being kept in the seized
administrative buildings; but the exact number and their identities remain unknown.
226. Also, journalists and editorial offices continue to be threatened and intimidated by armed

groups. For instance, on 14 May, the HRMMU received credible reports that those
journalists who work in the region but refuse to comply with the orders of the “Donetsk
People’s Republic” are threatened and harassed. Reportedly, the state regional television is
in a particularly difficult situation; its office has been practically blocked by
approximately 100 heavily armed men. On 21 May, an unidentified man called the
editorial office of the Public television of Donetsk region and threatened its journalists.
227. Local journalists have reported having to flee Donetsk and Luhansk regions due to such

threats and intimidation. On 8 May, two journalists from Donetsk had to move to Lviv out
of fear of persecution and threats. On 13 May, an internet resource in Severodonetsk
(Luhansk region) announced the forced suspension of activities and advised its journalists
to leave the town because of growing pressure and threats against their lives from the
armed groups. On 27 May, the editorial office of another local web-based outlet was
forced to relocate to a different town, reportedly, due to threats from the self-proclaimed
“Army of the South-East”. On 26 May, it was reported that the publisher and editor in
chief of one of the local newspapers in Kramatorsk was forced to flee the region with his
family due to threats they were receiving after he had refused to publish materials armed
representatives of “Donetsk People’s Republic” demanded him to publish.
Arbitrary arrests of journalists
228. In the reporting period, Ukrainian and Russian journalists have been arbitrarily arrested;

this raises concerns about the possibility for journalists to conduct their professional
activities safely.
·

On 10 May, a journalist of Russian TV channel Kuibishev 61, was allegedly
detained by the Ukrainian security forces at a checkpoint on the road between
Slovyansk and Kramatorsk. His whereabouts remain unknown to the family. On
22 May, the HRMMU sent an official inquiry to the MoI (via the MFA) about the
case. On 5 June, the HRMMU was informed that as of 15 May a criminal
investigation had been opened under Article 115 (Murder) of the Criminal Code.
The HRMMU has requested more information on this case.

·

On 15 May, a journalist and cameraman of the ICTV Ukrainian channel were
arrested on the border (Kharkiv / Belhorod) while performing editorial tasks by
the Border Service and Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation,.
Reportedly, after more than 15 hours of questioning without water and food and
deleting all photo and video materials, the journalists were released.
38

·

Two LifeNews journalists, Oleg Sidyakin and Marat Saychenko, were detained on
18 May near Kramatorsk during a raid by Ukrainian forces against the armed
groups. They were released on 24 May (see section B, chapter V).

·

The HRMMU also followed closely the case of a British journalist working for
Russia Today detained by the National Guard in Mariupol on 20 May for
allegedly filming military objects. He was released on 21 May and transferred to
the Consulate of the United Kingdom in Kyiv. After his release he tweeted details
of his detention, including that he had been treated fairly.

·

On the night of 6 June, two journalists of the Russian TV station “Zvezda” were
detained by the National Guard of Ukraine (NGU) at a checkpoint near
Slovyansk. According to their driver, who was also initially detained and later
released, the journalists were cuffed, balaclavas were put on their heads, and they
were forced to kneel down in a ditch (allegedly, to protect them from possible
shooting). On 7 June, the NGU issued a statement saying that journalists were
suspected of monitoring and collecting information. The MFA of the Russian
Federation reportedly filed a note of protest to the MFA of Ukraine. On 8 June
2014, the TV station “Zvezda” received information from the SBU that the two
journalists were in good health. They were released on 9 June and transferred to
the Russian Federation.

Obstruction to lawful professional journalist activities
229. On 11 May, it was reported that Ukrainian journalists were not allowed to photograph or

film the voting process during the “referenda” in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
230. The same instances were reported prior and during the election day on 25 May. For

instance, the journalists of the Voice of America were warned not to film the seizure of
one of the polling stations in Donetsk.
Attacks on editorial offices and TV towers
231. In the reporting period, there has been a growing number of armed attacks on the editorial

offices of the local media outlets by armed men. Some of the examples are provided
below.
· On 7 May, the office of the local newspaper “Hornyak” in Torez (Donetsk Region)

was reportedly attacked and its equipment was broken and damaged.
· On 8 May, the independent newspaper “Provintsiya” in Kostyantynivka was

attacked by armed, masked men, allegedly members of the “Donetsk People’s
Republic”. The editors were told the paper was “closed” and taken to the “city
commander’s office” situated in the occupied building of the City Council, where
they were threatened and suggested to leave the town. The police was called, but
did not interfere or arrested the attackers. The editors did not file a complaint
because they do not trust the police will act and because they feel threatened and
fear for their lives.
· On 11, 13, 19 and 20 May, armed groups shelled the TV tower in Slovyansk,

which led to interruptions in broadcasting. On 14 May, in Kramatorsk, the armed
groups blocked the TV tower, which transmits the channels not only for
Kramatorsk, but also Slovyansk, Horlivka and Makiivka.

39

Censorship / access to information
232. According to NGOs, freedom of media in the Donetsk region is severely curtailed, with

Ukrainian TV channels switched off by the “Donetsk People’s Republic” and replaced by
the its own media programmes and Russian TV. Some of the examples include the
following:
· On 8 and 25 May, armed group stormed the office of the local TV Channel

“Union” with demands to report about the activity of “Donetsk People’s Republic”
and declared their intent to control the activity of journalists. The target audience
of the channel is about 3 million people in nine towns of Donetsk region.
· On 8 May, under threat of physical violence from the armed groups, the company

“Vokar Holding” was forced to stop retransmission of Ukrainian TV Channels:
“Inter”, “Ukraine”, “1+1”, ICTV, STB, “New Channel”, “5th Channel”, “112
Ukraine”, and “TVI” in Severodonetsk, Luhansk region. Instead the Russian
channels were broadcasted. The same incidents occurred throughout May in
Luhansk and its region (Krasnyi Luch, Alchevsk).
· On 2 June, armed members of the so-called “Donbas People’s Militia” arrived at

the office of the newspapers “Donbas” and “Vecherniy Donetsk” and blocked all
entrances and exits. They abducted the editor-in-chief of the “Donbas” and his
deputy and the editor-in-chief of “Vecherniy Donetsk”. The armed men reportedly
used psychological pressure and death threats to change the editorial policy of the
newspapers and ensure more positive coverage of the “Donetsk People’s
Republic”. The three editors were eventually released on 3 June after which all the
“Donbas” employees were sent on leave and the newspaper stopped its publication.
Also, the HRMMU has noted specific hate speech on the “official” media outlet of
the “Donetsk People’s Republic” “Anna Info News”. On 20 May Oleksandr
Mozhayev, known as "Babai" (a fighter participating in the armed groups) referred
to the on-going operations as a “Holy War” and spoke of exterminating America.
· On 5 June, a local cable TV and Internet network provider in Donetsk terminated

the broadcast of Ukrainian channels: “1+1”, “Donbas”, “UBR” and “News24” at
the demand of “Donetsk People’s Republic” representatives.
Propaganda
233. The HRMMU reiterates the importance to counter misinformation, incitement to hatred,

discrimination, and violence. As an example, the “Donetsk People’s Republic” denied all
responsibility for the attack near Volnovakha, claiming that it was the National Guard
“paid by Kolomoiskiy” which perpetrated this attack on the Ukrainian military. On 27
May, LifeNews posted a photo of a wounded child stating he was shot in the Donetsk
International Airport; however the StopFake.org experts discovered that the photo was
from the Syrian city of Aleppo in April 2013. Although the original publication in twitter
was deleted, the photo was widely used for similar posts on alleged shootings of children.
A different photo with a dead boy's body in a coffin was used for similar messages of
alleged shooting of children in eastern Ukraine. The photo, however, was made in 2010, in
the Crimean city Dzhankoy, of a boy killed by a local criminal.
234. Similarly, various videos became viral, allegedly showing either atrocities by the

Ukrainian army, seizing of "Grad" complexes by armed groups, or of the use UN symbols
on Ukrainian helicopters used in the security operations. It was also demonstrated that
originals of such videos were also filmed earlier in the Russian Federation or in other
countries, and had nothing to do with the current events in Ukraine.
40

235. Misinformation adds to the instability and fear which affect the lives of people in the

region, and all sides should refrain from using it, especially to the extent that it amounts to
advocacy to national hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or
violence, which is prohibited under Article 20 of the ICCPR.
D.

Freedom of religion or belief

236. On 15 May, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchy (UOC-KP)

condemned the violence and threats to the life and health of the clergy and the faithful of
eastern Ukraine by armed groups. The statement by the Holy Synod of the UOC-KP calls
for the Moscow Patriarchate to condemn collaboration with the supporters of the selfproclaimed “people’s republics” and distance itself from it. The UOC-KP requested the
Government of Ukraine to protect the clergy and congregation of the Kyiv Patriarchy in
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions from the attacks and threats of the “criminals”.
237. In the statement, the Church also appeals to the international community and inter-

religious social human right organizations to pay attention to the infringement of rights of
the believers of UOC-KP in the eastern parts of Ukraine and in Crimea.
238. In Donetsk, numerous attacks against the inter-religious Prayer Marathon (attended by all

major denominations except the Moscow Patriarchy) took place almost on a daily basis in
May, including heavy beatings of participants, the destruction of property, and threats to
organisers and volunteers. On 23 May, after a repeated attack by 15 representatives of the
“Donetsk People’s Republic”, in an attempt to discuss security arrangements for the
Prayer Marathon, its coordinator allegedly went to the occupied building of the Donetsk
Regional State Administration. While there he was allegedly heavily beaten and had to
seek medical assistance. The Prayer Marathon has continued gathering in June. No
incidents have been reported.
239. Reports have also been received of other denominations being attacked, for example,

Protestants.
E.

Economic and social rights – impact of the violence

240. As background to the situation in the eastern regions and the current impact on economic

and social rights being faced by the local population, the HRMMU recalls that Ukraine is
a middle-income country, ranked 78 in the Human Development Index in 2013.
241. The recent evaluation of the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

(ESCR) published on 23 May 2014, highlighted the positive steps of the Government in
ratification of, or accession to, various human rights instruments. At the same time the
Committee identified major problems that have an adverse impact on the enjoyment of all
human rights, including the large extent of corruption, discrimination against Roma and
Crimean Tatars, a low level of social standards, unemployment among youth, around 30%
gender pay gap, employment in the informal economy, a stable poverty rate of 24.7%,
absence of a health insurance system, and low expenditure on health care.
242. The Committee made related recommendations to address the root causes of the

aforementioned challenges.
243. The violence and security operations in the eastern regions has had a direct impact on the

existing level of enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights, and has also influenced

41

the State capacity to progressively realize the rights and comply with the Committee´s
recommendations in the areas struck by the conflict.
Right to education
244. Despite the efforts of the Donetsk Department of education and science, as well as school

administrations, studies had to be suspended in several towns of the Donetsk region in
May. In Slovyansk, Krasnyi Lyman and Krasnoarmiysk, 62 schools and 46 kindergartens
were not functioning, which affected 21,700 students and 5,600 children, respectively. On
28 May, it was reported that during the fights in Slovyansk two school buildings have
been damaged; no one was injured.
245. In other towns in the Donetsk region schools remained open, but attendance varied from

25% in Slovyansk district to 98% in Makiivka district.
246. Most schools in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions managed to complete the academic

year, which finished on 30 May. The main concern had been the organisation of the
“External Independent Assessment18” for the students of these eastern regions. On 29
May, the Ministry of Education announced that testing in these regions would be
postponed until 11 July to 27 July, and if necessary could be postponed again.
247. Following instructions issued by the Ministry of Education and Science, all universities in

the eastern regions had to ensure that foreign students finished their studies earlier, by 20
May, so that they could leave the country.19
248. Reportedly, school administrations have faced various forms of pressure from

representatives of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” including in the preparation and
holding of the “referendum” of 11 May, as well as establishing temporary “hideouts” in
school premises.
Right to health
249. Due to the growing number of wounded, hospitals are overcrowded and understaffed. As

of 28 May, in order to minimize the risk to life and security of patients, the Regional
Hospital of occupational diseases in Donetsk partially discharged patients whose medical
condition did not require in-ward treatment. A sanatorium for children with cerebral palsy
was closed in Donetsk due to its proximity to the occupied Security Service of Ukraine
building. On 26 May, Children’s Hospital Nr 1 and city hospital Nr 18 had to close due to
the proximity to Donetsk airport20.
250. Access to medical services, treatment and supplies for residents in areas most affected by

the fighting is becoming more and more challenging. This is of particular concern as more
residents are caught in the crossfire between the armed groups and Ukrainian forces. The
18

A final test for the high school students to enter universities in Ukraine.
On 29 and 30 April, The Ministry of Education and Science issued two letters Nr 1/9 - 228 and Nr 08.0147/12033 instructing all universities of Ukraine, particularly in the East, to terminate the studies of all foreign
students by 20 May, which is much earlier than usually. Reportedly, the decision was made upon request of the
embassies of foreign countries so that foreign students could complete exams and leave the country if they
wish so due to the security situation. Allegedly, at the end of April there were two attacks in eastern regions on
foreign students; however the HRMMU could not verify these facts.
20
On 26 May 2014, approximately 20-30 armed representatives of the “Donetsk People’s Republic” reportedly
arrived at Donetsk International Airport. According to the Press-Secretary of the Donetsk International Airport
Dmytro Kosinov, they demanded the Ukrainian Armed Forces, which were guarding the airport, to withdraw.
Fighting broke out at 7.00 a.m. and at that time the airport was closed. It was reported that it will stay out of
service till 30 June. According to some reports the main terminal was partially destroyed and some fighting is
still on-going there.
19

42

situation is most difficult in Slovyansk. The overcrowded, understaffed and under
resourced hospitals are only admitting those who are severely injured. Primary Health
Care services are overloaded and at times called to provide treatments and care that are
within their capacity. Patients from the Mental Health Hospital (229 persons) were
evacuated from Slovyansk. All emergency services have been relocated to the nearby
village of Mykolayivka, with a number of medical number units set up in Svyatohirsk
(location of a large Russian Orthodox monastery - the Lavra). Some patients were
transferred to Poltava region. Pharmacies are open only a few hours per day.
251. The delivery of supplies, particularly medicines, becomes more complicated every day;

especially with the Donetsk airport being out of service. Reports and requests sent to the
UN agencies indicate the lack of specific medications, including some antibiotics, painkillers, vaccines and consumables. In Donetsk, insulin was distributed to various locations;
however, such deliveries are becoming more difficult. Supplies of food in hospitals are
running low.
252. There have been reported difficulties to ensure uninterrupted provision of opioid

substitution therapy (OST)21. This directly affects 759 persons (56% of whom are HIV
positive) in Donetsk region and 609 (13% are HIV positive) in Luhansk region. According
to the HIV/AIDS Alliance and the Wold Health Organisation, in a number of cities, such
as Slovyansk, the healthcare facilities providing OST are completely controlled by armed
groups. The fact that pharmaceuticals in the healthcare facilities in the districts have fallen
beyond the legitimate authorities’ control, is in its essence a certain risk factor for medical
staff and patients. On 30 May, OST treatment was stopped for more than 100 patients in
Mariupol, due to drugs not being delivered because of the security situation. As of 2 June,
HIV service organisations reported that for some patients such an interruption in treatment
had resulted in people using illegal drugs. In the long run, this may lead to an increase in
cases of HIV and hepatitis infections due to intravenous drug use. Due to the numerous
check-points and blocked roads, as well as interruptions in public transport, the specialized
hospital for HIV/AIDS patients in Yasynovata, Donetsk region, is practically inaccessible.
Conditions for treatment of patients
253. The conditions for the treatment of patients, including those who have been wounded in

fighting and violence, are precarious As the security situation deteriorates, so does the
access to hospital care and the quality that can be provided by medical professionals. For
example, in Slovyansk, medical personnel were already highlighting the problems with the
delivery of medical supplies to the city. In the regions affected by violence and the
ongoing security operations, hospitals are trying to allocate what funds they have to
purchase the medical supplies they require. In early June, some hospitals in Donetsk
discharged patients, except those in critical condition or those who were immobile, leaving
the hospitals almost empty.
254. Due to the lack of trust regarding law enforcement, both the medical personnel and

patients try to conceal the facts and nature of wounds (the standard protocol is that
medical institutions have to report any gunshot and/ stab wounds to the police). The
HRMMU has received credible reports that doctors are at times trying to ensure the
security of the wounded.

21

This has been an integral part of the widespread implementation of harm reduction programmes. These
programmes are an essential element in controlling HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases among injecting
drug users in Ukraine, as elsewhere in Eastern Europe.

43

255. Cooperation with local civil society and community volunteers is an important part of

treatment of those who suffered in the recent months. The volunteers, local NGOs,
political parties and priests donated money, clothes, food, and medical drugs and provided
psychological support. In some cases, when expensive purchases were necessary – such as
plates for head surgery – they were purchased by charitable organizations, which also
provided financial support to the victims after they were discharged from the medical
institutions – to receive rehabilitation treatment in sanatoria. In the local hospitals where
the wounded were brought – such as after the shooting on 22 May near Volnovakha in the
Donetsk region – there were instances when the local community cared and protected the
wounded, bringing them medical drugs, food and clothes.
256. Security in hospitals has been reported to the HRMMU as a concern with patients having

to be protected from potential abductions by armed groups. The officials from the Donetsk
Regional State Administration confirmed that such kidnappings of the wounded had taken
place, however there is no official record of such cases, thus no exact figure could be
provided. There is also an increased risk for healthcare professionals themselves,
particularly if it involves moving around in the case of ambulance medical teams.
Right to an adequate standard of living
257. Since 17 May, prices for basic commodities (including bread) have been rising by a

minimum 0.73 Hryvnia (UAH) and 1-2 UAH on average due to higher risks of production
and delivery of goods into the occupied towns through numerous checkpoints. Seasonal
vegetables and fruits are 4-5 UAH more expensive than usual.
258. Also, due to increased cases of looting, private businesses and retailers prefer to close

down, which creates scarcity of supply. Consequently, while the minimum set of products
is always available, the variety is much less. Often times there are interruptions in delivery
of dairy products, fruits and vegetables, and non-alcohol drinks.
Housing
259. The HRMMU is concerned when security operations take place in residential areas of

towns and villages of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions. As of 30 May, there had been
reports of ruined residential buildings in Slovyansk, Kramatorsk and Donetsk.
Additionally, on 7 June, it was reported that nine houses were damaged by the Ukrainian
army shelling in Semyonovka near Slovyansk.
260. The HRMMU will raise this and other similar issues with the Ukrainian Government,

including advocating for monetary compensation to be awarded to the victims for damages
to their property in the course of these security operations.
Electricity and water supply
261. As of 18 May, in the Slovyansk region, 22 electrical sub-stations stopped functioning. As

a result, more than 2,000 households were left without access to electricity. According to
the Press-service of the company “Donetskoblenergo”, the company has all the necessary
material and human resources for reconstruction. However, repair crews are unable to
access the site due to the ongoing security operations.
262. In the northern part of the Donetsk region, the supply of water supply is increasingly under

threat, with regular interruptions. Moreover, as of 3 June, residents of Slovyansk,
Konstyantynivka, Druzhkivka and Kramatorsk (cities in Donetsk region) had no access to
running water, due to damage to the water supply reportedly as a result of the security
operations.

44

Social security (services and benefits)
263. Due to the deteriorating security situation in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, it is a

growing challenge to ensure continuous work of State institutions. On 14 May, the
Pension Fund department resumed its work (after the seizure of its building on 5 May) in
Slovyansk, but the department’s office hours were cut. On 15 May, it was reported that the
National Bank of Ukraine suspended22 the operations of its office in Donetsk region due to
the threats by the representatives of the "Donetsk People's Republic”. On 15 May, the
Ministry of Revenue and Duties of Ukraine also evacuated the staff of its directorate and
tax inspections in the region.
264. On 7 June, the Ministry of Social Policy informed the HRMMU that all social payments

had been made to the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. However, there were major
challenges in delivering cash to Antratsyt in Luhansk region and Slovyansk and
Kramatorsk in Donetsk region. The Ministry has already addressed the MoI and SBU to
develop a mechanism of the safe delivery of cash to these regions if the situation remains
the same or aggravates.
265. On 30 May, the head of Department of Marketing Communications of the

Novokramatorskiy Machine-Building Plant Volodymyr Zhuliy spoke of the imminent
“humanitarian catastrophe” in Kramatorsk, due to the termination of the work of the city
department of the State Treasury of Ukraine since 20 May. In particular, Mr Zhuliy
mentioned that thousands of the city’s pensioners, local governance workers, educators
and public health workers were deprived of the means for existence. Reportedly, the
Treasury’s debt to the workers and pensioners in Kramatorsk for the payments due in May
already amounted to UAH 61.4 million.
Increased lawlessness resulting in loss of individual property
266. On 15 May, the Parliament Commissioner for Human Rights informed the HRMMU that

there are numerous incidents in Donetsk and Luhansk regions when the armed groups’
members seize personal phones and especially cars from ordinary citizens. The police
rarely intervene or take any action, as they are usually unarmed and thus unable to perform
their functions in the current situation. Consequently, although criminality is increasing,
there is nobody to apply to in case of an alleged crime, and no effective means to intervene
for police. It also becomes dangerous for persons to report about such crimes, so in most
cases they chose to leave the region. The increase in criminality is, in the view of some,
returning the regions to the “lawlessness of the 1990s”:

22

·

For example, on 8 May, the private residence of a local activist was allegedly shot
at from a car; the attackers broke into the house and looted everything of value.
The police called by the neighbours, allegedly made several photos of the
location, but did not even walk into the building. Reportedly, the activist left the
region to Kharkiv with his family, due to previous threats to his life, including
attempted arson of his home with Molotov cocktails on 4 May.

·

On 15 May, owners of car-dealerships in the cities of Donetsk and Luhansk
regions formed rapid response groups to protect their businesses against attacks
aimed at robbery that have multiplied since the beginning of May.

·

On 28 May, the HRMMU spoke to one of the local political leaders in the
Donetsk region. He reported that his legal firm’s office was ruined when attackers
took his computers, documentation on the legal cases and stole the firm’s car. He

The staff of the Bank was evacuated, and online banking in the region was reportedly suspended.

45

was also detained for 7-8 hours and subjected to life threats, inhumane treatment
and beating. After his release he fled the region together with his family.
Labour rights
267. There are growing concerns about the ability of enterprises in Donetsk and Luhansk

regions to continue functioning due to the on-going fighting, targeted attacks and
intimidations by the armed groups.
268. The presence of uncontrolled armed groups and rise of criminality obstruct the business

activity of entrepreneurs, which first of all affects small companies in the sphere of
services and retail (banks, logistic companies, stores, petrol stations, and bakeries).
269. On 20 May, the Mayor of Donetsk, Oleksandr Lukyanchenko, stated that a wide range of

enterprises do not work in full capacity and some of them suspend production, in
particular, “Donetsk Metallurgical Plant” employing approximately 2,100 persons.
270. On 29 May, the Secretary of the National Security and Defence Parliamentary Committee,

Sergey Kaplin, stated that due to the current events in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions,
approximately 60 % industrial enterprises of companies were forced to suspend their
work, leaving thousands of employees without regular income.
271. There also have been armed attacks on mining companies, which constitute the main share

of the regions’ economy. On 9 May, it was reported that local miners repelled an attack by
the pro-Russian supporters of the “Donetsk People’s Republic”, who attempted to take
down the Ukrainian flag and threatened the miners that they would throw explosives into
the mine’s shafts for their disobedience. Allegedly, the miners decided to organize their
own “self-defence” to protect themselves. On 19 May, there were armed attacks on the
operational and closed coal mines in Horlivka, Donetsk region. On 22 May, a group of
unidentified armed individuals allegedly captured four operating mines of the JSC
"Lysychanskvuhillya" in Luhansk region. All of the four attacked mines temporarily
suspended production activities. Reportedly the armed men pointed guns at the mines’
workers, demanding to supply them with explosives. The Ministry of Energy of Ukraine
appealed to the SBU demanding that necessary steps be taken to protect the mines.
Previously, on 26-27 May, due to pressure by the armed representatives of the “Donetsk
People’s Republic” on the “Donetsk Coal-Mining Company”, coal production was
suspended at several mines, including “Octyabrskiy Rudnik”, “E. Abakumov”, “A.
Skochinskogo” and “Trudovskaya”.
272. On 20 May, Denys Pushylin, “speaker” of the “Donetsk People’s Republic”, announced

the launch of the nationalization campaign in the region. According to their official
sources, Mr. Pushylin blamed the local oligarchs` unwillingness to pay taxes to the
“republic’s” budget, and their opposition to the interests of Donbas as the reason for the
adopted decision to start the nationalization. In particular, Mr Pushylin blamed Renat
Akhmetov, owner of the company System Capital Management.
The broader impact of the crisis in the eastern regions of Ukraine
273. Recent developments in the country have already negatively affected the financial and

banking system. In the first quarter of 2014, the national currency depreciated by 27%,
dramatically reducing incomes and salaries. Whereas the average monthly wage in
December stood at $453, by March it had dropped to $343. This also puts significant
pressure on those who have loans in foreign currencies.

46

274. After remaining quiescent for more than two years, inflation rates have shot up with a

6.8% increase in consumer prices reported for the beginning of May being the highest
year-on-year inflation rate recorded since 2011.
275. Food prices have increased by 8.2% above 2013 levels, bringing the socio-economic crisis

to many households in Ukraine. Large price hikes were reported for sugar (59%),
vegetables (33%), and dairy products and eggs (10%).
276. Other inflationary pressures are now gathering, for example in the form of increases in

communal service tariffs. Household gas prices shot up 56% on average in May; a 40%
increase in heating tariffs is scheduled for July. These higher tariffs are projected to
increase the numbers of low-income households from 1.4 to 4 million during this time.
277. Should these tariff increases be accompanied by a further weakening of the UAH,

Ukraine’s inflation rates could dramatically accelerate. Even in the best case scenario,
consumer and food price inflation rates seem likely to remain in double figures for the rest
of 2014, and going into 2015. These developments will place increased pressure, and
need, for Ukraine’s social welfare system to cushion the impact, particularly for the most
vulnerable.
278. The 63 billion UAH deficit recorded on the consolidated government budget in 2013

(some 9% of GDP) is regarded as unsustainable by both the Government and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). Fiscal austerity in 2014 is therefore required.
Although a justified measure, it may do little to boost the country’s long term
competitiveness or development prospects. Already in the first quarter of 2014
Government expenditure23 in the health sector declined by 5%, and in the education sector
by 8%, compared to the budget allocations in 2013. At the same time, the Government has
been able to increase spending on social protection by 2% (which includes expenditures
on both social assistance and social insurance) for 2014, which may lessen the hardships
and pressures that many Ukrainian households are now facing.
279. The economy of the eastern region has already been in decline since April 2014, and it is

likely to deteriorate further in any protracted situation of violence and fighting. Business is
in decline in the region; personal income is decreasing; investments are dwindling.
Compared to 2013, in the first quarter of 2014 investments in the eastern regions had
significantly declined. In the annual rating Donetsk region moved from third place in 2013
to twenty-second place in 2014, and the Luhansk region from ninth to twenty-third.
280. Any exacerbation of the violence will lead to the further decline of industrial production in

the region and Ukraine as a whole. The industries of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions
account for 18.5% and 6.1% of all production in the country respectively. Such a decline
would therefore increase the imbalance between the income of the state budget from the
Donbas and expenditure provided to the region. This will augment the budget deficit. One
result could be that it would jeopardise compliance with the agreed parameters of the IMF
loan.
281. Official statistics released in May indicate that Ukraine’s GDP dropped 1% in the first

quarter of 2014. The recession is expected to worsen over the course of the year: IMF and
the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade forecast a 3% decline in GDP, while
other, more pessimistic forecasts point to 5-10% declines in output and income. The
largest decline in exports (70-85%—relative to the fourth quarter of 2013) has already
23

Changes are given in real terms: changes in nominal expenditure amounts divided by changes in the consumer
price index.

47

been recorded in the regions of Donetsk, Luhansk, Cherkasy, and Khmelnitskyi, as well in
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. Any collapse in exports could trigger a decline in
industrial output, and subsequently in household incomes and livelihoods. These trends
should be closely monitored.
282. There are concerns that if these macro-economic tendencies continue, the State will no

longer be able to guarantee existing social standards, which could lead to the social unrest
spreading throughout the country.

VI. PARTICULAR HUMAN RIGHTS CHALLENGES IN CRIMEA
A.

Civil and political rights of Crimean residents

283. Crimean residents faced difficulties in exercising their civil and political rights. A very

small number participated in the Presidential elections of 25 May. Simplified registration
procedures had been put in place to ensure that residents of Crimea and persons who
resettled from Crimea to other regions can take part in the vote. Ukrainian citizens living
in Crimea had to register in person at any polling station on the mainland no later than five
days prior to the elections. The HRMMU monitored the situation near Kherson, where
most of the Crimean voters had registered. Some 20 cars had left Crimea and were
welcomed by local authorities. They drove to the polling station in a column with Crimean
and Ukrainian flags. Prior to the election they had been summoned by the Crimean police
for “conversations" and issued ‘warnings’ about the unacceptability of ‘extremist
activities’. While the cars were crossing the administrative border, representatives of the
Crimean ‘self-defence’ reportedly wrote down license plates, passport numbers and
driving licenses' details. Among those who intended to vote, many allegedly did not do so
because of the cost of travelling, the uncertainty linked to having to cross the
administrative border and the fear of reprisals by the authorities in Crimea.
284. During its month-long monitoring of events in Crimea, the HRMMU noted a continuation

of worrying trends, including instances of enforced disappearances, arbitrary detentions,
violence and ill-treatment committed by the so-called ‘Crimean self-defence’, often
targeting journalists, human rights defenders and political opponents, and impunity for
human rights violations. Furthermore the enforcement of the Russian Federation law on
the territory of Crimea, at variance with UN General Assembly resolution 68/262 and
applicable bodies of international law, is creating difficulties for Crimean residents to
enjoy their human rights, as there are many differences with Ukrainian laws.
Rule of law and the judiciary
285. The judicial system remains practically paralyzed. Ukrainian laws will be in effect in

Crimea until 31 December 201424. Nevertheless, the judicial system is already being
transformed to use Russian laws: restriction measures are implemented pursuant to the
Criminal Procedural Code of the Russian Federation, and judicial decisions are adopted in
the name of the Russian Federation. Pending cases that have not been decided by 18
March 2014 must be tried in accordance with the laws of the Russian Federation. This
poses numerous problems in practice, especially in administrative and criminal cases,
when Russian and Ukrainian legislation differs on the existence, nature and scope of rights
24

Paragraph 2 of Article 23 of the Federal Constitutional Law of 21 March 2014 N 6-FCL “On Acceptance of
the Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation and the Creation of the New Constituent Entity within the
Russian Federation - the Republic of Crimea and the Federal City of Sevastopol”.

48

and obligations; and remedies and sanctions available. The outcome of court decisions that
are currently being appealed is unclear.
286. There are reports that, at least, 15,000 judicial cases are in legal limbo between Ukrainian

and Russian laws. The Ukrainian “Law on the occupied territories” allows the transfer of
judicial cases from the peninsula to Kyiv. However, in practice, this is unlikely to happen.
The HRMMU notes that the current situation has detrimental consequences affecting
access to justice, the right to fair trial and due process for Crimean residents.
Right to life, liberty and security
287. The Russian Security Service (FSB) confirmed on 30 May, the detention of four Ukrainian

citizens in Simferopol (Crimea), including film-maker Oleg Sentsov. The other three are
Aleksandr Kolchenko, Gennady Afanasiev and Aleksei Chyrnyi. The HRMMU spoke to
Mr. Sentsov’s lawyer who stated that while his client had been arrested on 11 May, he
managed to speak to him for the first time on 27 May. He also claims his client has been
tortured while in detention to confess to criminal intentions he did not have. According to
the FSB press release, the people detained are members of the Ukrainian ‘Right Sector’
party and were planning acts of sabotage and terrorism in Simferopol, Yalta and
Sevastopol. On 6 June, Sentsov was, according to his lawyer, officially charged with
terrorism and arms trafficking under Article 205, Part 2; Article 205.4, Part 2; and Article
222, Part 3 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation.
288. On 26 May, Timur Shaimardanov (born in 1980) left his home in Simferopol and did not

return. He had participated in campaigns against Crimea becoming a part of the Russian
Federation. The day before he went missing, he allegedly said that the whereabouts of one
of his friends, Leonid Korzh, (born in 1990) had not been known for 3-4 days. On 30 May,
Seiran Zinedinov, who had been coordinating the efforts to find Korzk and Shaimardanov
also went missing.
289. Mr. Mustafa Dzhemilev, former head of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis (Assembly) who was

banned from the authorities in Crimea to enter the peninsula on 3 May, informed the
HRMMU that the “Crimean police” had brought to his Crimean house a summons for an
interrogation related to illegal possession of weapons. Dzhemilev assumes that this could
be an attempt to initiate a criminal case against him. Ms. Ella Panfilova, Ombudsperson of
the Russian Federation, announced that her office has requested from the relevant
Governmental bodies an explanation of the actions undertaken by officials towards
Mustafa Dzhemilev, particularly regarding his ban on entering Crimea.
290. The Head of the Kurultai (Congress) of the Crimean Tatars, Zayr Smedlyaev, informed

HRMMU that he had received a written “warning” from the Crimean police about the
"inadmissibility of extremist activities and unlawful assemblies", in line with Russian
legislation. The notice says that on 3 May, the leaders of the Mejlis publicly spoke in
support of ‘extremist statements’ by Mustafa Dzhemilev and provoked extremist
manifestations from people.
291. On 15 May, three houses of Crimean Tatars in Simferopol were searched by FSB officials.

Two houses belong to the head of the External Relations Department of the Mejlis, Ali
Khamzin. The searches were performed at his actual place of residence (Bakhchysarai)
and his place of registration (Strogonovka village, Simferopol region). FSB officials
explained that these persons were suspected of preparing terrorist attacks.
292. On 15 May, the “Chairman” of the Council of Ministers of Crimea, Sergey Aksyonov,

announced that the so-called “Crimean self-defence” would become regular and receive
budgetary support to ensure public security. The HRMMU underlines that such an
49

intention raises concern as the “Crimean self-defence” has reportedly been involved in
numerous human rights violations.
Accountability
293. The HRMMU is concerned that after more than two months of investigation of the murder

of 39year-old Reshat Ametov, the Crimean law-enforcement authorities have not yet
established the identities of perpetrators, although a video of the attackers is available that
would allow their identification. Crimean Tatar Reshat Ametov was abducted by
unidentified persons wearing military uniform in the centre of Simferopol in early March
during a picket near the Council of Ministers of Crimea. On 17 March, his corpse was
found with traces of torture in the Zemlyanichnoye village of the Belogorsk district.
294. The acting Prosecutor General of Ukraine reported on 27 May that an interagency

‘working group for legal issues relating to the temporarily occupied territory of Crimea’
had been established. The working group will coordinate the activities of the Ukrainian
authorities on a wide range of legal issues connected with the violations that took place
after the March “referendum”.
Citizenship
295. The HRMMU received worrisome information that, in some cases, Crimean residents

were forced to give up their Ukrainian citizenship, which may amount to arbitrary
deprivation of nationality. Judges of the Crimean Commercial Court in Simferopol and the
administrative staff, who were granted Russian citizenship on a priority basis, were
reportedly compelled to complete application forms renouncing Ukrainian citizenship. In
general, the procedure of issuing Russian passports is slow. According to different
calculations, providing passports to the whole population of Crimea will take up to 15
months while Russian laws allocated only three months for this procedure. Besides, it is
unclear how citizenship issues, applications for social benefits and payments and other
rights and entitlements are organised for persons in closed institutions: orphanages,
geriatric institutions, psycho-neurological hospitals, penitentiaries, and others.
296. The status of refugees and asylum seekers has not been regulated. Prior to the

“referendum” there were 18 refugees on the territory of Crimea. It is unclear how their
situation will be affected by the changed legal regime.
297. On 4 June, the President of the Russian Federation signed amendments to the law “On

citizenship of the Russian Federation”, introducing criminal responsibility for concealment
of dual citizenship. According to the amended law, those concealing their second
citizenship will be fined up to 200,000 Rubles ($5,700) or subjected to compulsory
community service of up to 400 hours in case of a failure to notify the Federal Migration
Service within two months from the date of the acquisition of the second citizenship. The
new provisions will become effective on 1 January 2016.
Freedom of expression
298. The HRMMU is alarmed by excessive limitations placed on freedom of information and

expression in Crimea. Journalists, human rights defenders and other individuals must be
able to freely exercise their right to freedom of expression, in accordance with article 19 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Any restrictions should comply
with the strict requirements of article 19, paragraph 3 of the Covenant.
299. On 15 May, a photojournalist of the "Crimean telegraph" newspaper Maksim Vasilenko

was briefly detained and ill-treated by members of the "self-defence of Crimea" in
Simferopol while preparing a report about the training of the special police forces before
50

the commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the Crimean Tatar Deportation. A
cameraman of the "FM" television channel was also attacked; his phone was taken and his
equipment was broken.
300. On 18 May, Osman Pashayev, Chief Editor of "Open Crimean Channel" internet project,

and his crew (correspondent, cameraman and driver) were detained by members of the
“Crimean self-defence” during the mourning events related to the anniversary of the
Crimean Tatar Deportation. They were deprived of their equipment, phones and personal
belongings, and subjected to physical and psychological pressure for four hours. No
reasons were given for the detention. After being brought to the central district police
station of Simferopol, they saw their lawyers and were released. Their money and personal
belongings were not returned. Russian Human Rights Ombudsperson Ella Pamfilova
condemned the incident, saying that the detention and interrogation of Pashayev and his
crew without the presence of a lawyer for several hours constituted a human rights
violation.
301. On 19 May, the “Crimean self-defence" detained for a short period of time Petr Ruzavin, a

correspondent of Russian television company "Dozhd", subjected him to violence and
damaged his equipment. According to Ruzavin, camouflaged people approached him
when he was filming the central square of Simferopol and they were filmed as well. They
requested him to delete his records, which he did. Ruzavin said he was beaten and his
equipment was damaged. After being interrogated he was released.
302. On 2 June, the “Acting Prosecutor” of Simferopol summoned the Chief Editor of the

Crimean Tatar newspaper “Avdet” Shevket Kaybullayev for questioning over possible
“extremist activity”. According to the notice, Kaybullayev had to appear on summons to
the Prosecutor’s Office. As written in the summons, the Prosecutor is investigating
violation of the Russian law “On counteraction to extremist activity”. The ‘Avdet’
newspaper is a press organ of the Mejlis of the Crimean Tatar people, published since 15
June 1990.
303. On 2 June, the Editor of the “Crimean Centre for Investigative Journalism”, Sergey

Mokrushyn, and his cameraman Vladlen Melnikov were attacked by members of the
“Crimean self-defence” in Simferopol, taken to their headquarters (on Kirova 26) and
beaten. They were eventually transferred to the police station for questioning, and released
without any explanation being given for their detention and or any protocol of detention
having been drawn up by the police.
304. The HRMMU recalls that acts of aggression, threats and intimidation against journalists

must be investigated, prosecuted and punished and victims provided with appropriate
remedies.
305. In the period of 12-25 May, the Russian Ministry of Communication and Mass Media and

the Federal Service for Supervision of Telecom, Information Technologies and Mass
Communications held seminars for Crimean journalists to explain requirements of Russian
legislation with respect to the media. The HRMMU is concerned that the imposition of
Russian media legislation is already negatively impacting the conditions for journalists to
freely perform their functions. There is also concern that media representatives can be
subjected to criminal prosecution pursuant to Article 280 (Public calls for extremism),
Article 282 (Organisation of the activities of an extremist organisation) and Article 319
(Insult of a public servant) of the Criminal Code of the Russian Federation, which are too
broad and can be used to criminalize conduct that is protected under international human
rights law.

51

Freedom of movement
306. While air connections between other parts of Ukraine and Crimea were suspended in

March 2014, it still remains possible to travel by train and car. However, freedom of
movement is affected by a number of factors related to the status of Crimea and different
regulations - Russian Federation and Ukraine’s - being applied. This creates difficulties to
maintain personal and professional ties.
307. Pursuant to the Law of “On guaranteeing citizens’ rights and freedoms and legal regime in

the temporarily occupied territory of Ukraine”, which entered into force on 10 May,
foreigners and stateless persons may enter and leave Crimea through security check-points
only subject to special permission. The procedure for obtaining such permission remains
unclear. On 16 May, the Press Secretary of the Chairman of the State Border Service of
Ukraine, Sergey Astakhov, confirmed that Ukrainian border guards around the Melitopol
checkpoint (in the Kherson region bordering Crimea) obliged persons going from Crimea
to continental Ukraine with Russian passports and Crimean residence permits to get off
trains. He reported that the Crimean residents with Russian passports are considered as
foreign citizens and, consequently, shall entry into Ukraine and leave it only through
special border points. According to him, the administrative border of Kherson and
established control line is not a border of Ukraine. Therefore, the foreign citizens,
including Russian citizens, may not be allowed via this line. He also noted that the
Crimean residents with Russian passports who wish to enter Ukraine shall go to the
Russian Federation first, for example, to Rostov-on-Don, and cross the borders there.
308. The Russian Federation illegally established its State border at the northern entrance to

Crimea on 25 April. Citizens of Ukraine who are not registered in Crimea are regarded as
foreigners and obliged to fill out an immigration card. Such a category also comprises the
people who permanently reside in Crimea, own real estate or are employed there, but
whose place of registration is mainland Ukraine. The Federal Immigration Service issued
warnings that foreign nationals must promptly (within 90 days) leave the territory of
Crimea and re-enter it pursuant to Russian laws applicable to foreign nationals. Inter alia,
such regulations will create inconveniences for students who study in other regions of
Ukraine and are temporarily registered there. While returning home to the territory of
Crimea during summer vacations, they will be regarded as foreigners with an admitted
stay of up to 90 days.
Freedom of association
309. Since the “referendum” on 16 March, many NGOs and human rights activists left Crimea

out of fear of being prosecuted, detained and subjected to ill-treatment. Legislation of the
Russian Federation - the so-called “foreign agents” law – has discouraged the activities
and development of NGOs. Besides, Crimea does not yet have an institution to register
civil society organisations; consequently, those that have not been registered before the
Crimean “referendum” are deprived of such a possibility.
Freedom of peaceful assembly
310. Dozens of Crimean Tatars have been summoned to courts for participating in protest

actions against the prohibition imposed on 3 May by the Crimean authorities on their
leader, Mustafa Dzhemilev, to enter the peninsula. As of 8 May, the courts of Crimea had
examined 55 cases related to those events. In 52 cases, the activists were fined on the basis
of Article 20.2.2 (Public disorder) of the Code on Administrative offences of the Russian
Federation.

52

311. On 16 May, the authorities in Crimea issued a decree prohibiting all mass events until 6

June. A similar prohibition was issued in Sevastopol. The degrees were motivated by
security developments in south-eastern Ukraine and the need to prevent "possible
provocations of extremists which can penetrate into the Republic of Crimea". The
HRMMU recalls that under Article 4 of the ICCPR, a derogation from the right to freedom
of assembly and association is only permissible “in time of public emergency” and “to the
extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation” and would require immediate
notification to the other State Parties to the ICCPR through the UN Secretary-General.
Freedom of religion or belief
312. The HRMMU is concerned about reports of violations of freedom of religion and belief on

the territory of Crimea.
313. On 8 May, the League of Muslim Women “Insaf” informed the HRMMU that some 150

persons from Kirovskoye and Stary Krym, including women, were being called in for
interrogations. Reportedly, they were being invited to the local police stations for “a
conversation”. They were reportedly fingerprinted and photographed.
314. On 20 May, the Head of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church made a statement

expressing concern for the safety of the Greek Catholic priests remaining in Crimea. He
reported that all five Crimean parishes had experienced pressure, allegedly from the
representatives of the Orthodox Church of the Moscow Patriarchate.
315. On 1 June, men in Russian Cossack uniforms reportedly broke into the local Orthodox

church of the Kyiv Patriarchate in the village of Perevalnoe (Crimea), shouting and
terrorizing churchgoers. The car of the priest was allegedly damaged. The “Cossacks” said
they were seizing the building for the Moscow Patriarchate. After three hours, the
“Crimean self-defence” arrived with assault rifles and sided with the attackers. The police
were called but reportedly did not show readiness to properly investigate the incident. On
2 June, the local authorities of the city of Evpatoriya conducted a check of the church
documentation and called it an “illegal building”. In addition, the authorities in Crimea
significantly raised the rent for the main Ukrainian Orthodox Cathedral in Simferopol. The
rent increase has not affected Crimean Tatar mosques or Russian Orthodox churches.
Mosques and Russian churches on the peninsula either belong to the religious
communities (mosques) or to the Moscow Patriarchate (Russian churches) or are rented
for a token fee.
B.

Economic, social and cultural rights

316. Crimean residents face serious challenges in realizing their rights under the International

Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ESCR). This can be attributed, in
part, to the complicated transition between two different legal systems, but also to the
absence of appropriate reactions of the authorities in Crimea to human rights violations
affecting certain communities. This concerns, in particular, the Ukrainian and Crimean
Tatar communities who are being harassed, assaulted and prosecuted for speaking
Ukrainian or Tatar languages in public places or using national symbols. Such conditions
are also reflected in the diminishing possibilities to receive education in another language
than Russian, particularly in Ukrainian.
Language and education
317. There are only two Ukrainian schools in Crimea: in Yalta and Simferopol. According to

the head of the Department of Education in Simferopol, three out of four classes in the

53

Simferopol gymnasium will now use the Russian language. The decision is motivated by
the decision of 86 % of the parents who reportedly decided to switch to Russian-language
studies. The director of the gymnasium was allegedly forced to resign. There is
information that the local authorities in Sevastopol are planning to close the only
Ukrainian boarding school/orphanage.
318. On 14 May, the press service of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian

Federation reported that teachers of the Ukrainian language and literature of general
educational institutions could be re-trained to become teachers of the Russian language
and literature. The Presidential Council for Civil Society Development and Human Rights
of the Russian Federation recommended to keep the study in the Simferopol Ukrainian
gymnasium in Ukrainian language and to resume the work of the Faculty of Ukrainian and
Crimean-Tatar Philology in the Tavrida National University.
319. In light of Article 27 of the ICCPR, the HRMMU recalls that all the national communities

in Crimea must be supported to preserve, develop and promote their identity, language and
culture, and to use their mother tongue in education and daily life.
Property rights
320. In early March, public notaries stopped documentation of property acquisition and sale

deals in Crimea, when Ukraine blocked access to the peninsula for the State Register of
Real Estate and Land Plots. Crimean residents face serious difficulties in exercising their
right to property due to the pending court decisions, transactions, and the privatisation
process. On 10 May, the Russian Minister of Crimean Affairs stated at a press conference
that the Russian authorities would deal with cases of unauthorized acquisition of land in
Crimea "with full responsibility and caution". On 28 May, a draft law “On the special
procedure for real estate registration in Crimea” was introduced in the Russian Parliament.
The text proposes to delegate to the local authorities, during a two-year transitional period,
the right to resolve land issues.
321. The HRMMU stresses that decisions concerning such important issues as land and

property must be taken through an inclusive, transparent and fair process that will
eliminate the risk of corruption and tensions.
Right to an adequate standard of living
322. On 13 May, the Ukrainian State Water Resources Agency stated that Ukraine shut off

water supplies to Crimea via the North-Crimean Canal, which accounts for 85% of all
fresh water on the peninsula. The Canal water is mostly used for irrigation purposes, and
its closure could severely impact agricultural land and the upcoming harvest. This
situation has reportedly had no negative implications for drinking water, according to the
‘First Deputy Chairman’ of the Council of Ministers of Crimea, Rustam Temirgaliyev.
Having no access to Crimea, the HRMMU does not have additional information about the
impact of the shut-off of water supplies on the economic and social rights of the Crimean
residents.
Banking
323. Access to banking services remains complicated for Crimean residents. On 7 May, the

National Bank of Ukraine (NBU) decided to suspend operations of Ukrainian banks in
Crimea until 6 June. However the activities of Ukrainian banks were terminated on 2 June,
by decision of the Central Bank of Russia motivated by the need to protect the interests of
depositors and customers. Compensation payments will reportedly be made by a nonprofit organization, the “Depositor Protection Fund”, which acquired the rights to deposits.
54

C.

The rights of indigenous peoples

324. The 18 May marked the 70th anniversary of the massive deportation of Crimean Tatars and

other minorities by the Soviet authorities. A Decree of the President of the Russian
Federation, in force on 21 April, had instructed the authorities in Crimea and Sevastopol to
support events commemorating the deportation. However, referring to security
considerations linked to the events in south-eastern Ukraine, the authorities in Crimea
issued on 16 May a decree prohibiting all mass events until 6 June. Eventually, the
“Council of Ministers” of Crimea decided on 17 May that the commemoration could go
ahead, although not in the centre of the capital of Crimea, Simferopol. The
commemorations passed without incidents, albeit with significant and sometimes
intimidating police presence.
325. On 29 May, the State archive of the SBU handed over the documents on Crimean Tatar

deportation from Crimea in 1944 to the representatives of the Crimean Tatar Mejlis. The
head of the SBU, Valentyn Nalyvaichenko, and the former head of the Crimean Tatar
Mejlis, Mustafa Dzhemilev, participated in this event.
326. On 4 June, the Crimean Parliament adopted a Decree providing for social guarantees to

the people who were deported on an ethnic basis in 1941-1944 from the Crimean
Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic. The Decree will provide social benefits in the
form of one-time payments to the Crimean Tatars, Armenians, Bulgarians, Greeks and
Germans, along with their families and children who were born in exile. This document
was adopted pursuant to a Decree signed by Russian President Vladimir Putin on 21 April
2014, rehabilitating formerly deported people from Crimea.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

327. During the reporting period, the HRMMU identified acute human rights concerns

particularly in the eastern regions, Crimea and in the aftermath of the Odesa 2 May
violence. They are symptomatic of the particular local contexts, not least involving the
presence of armed groups, the breakdown in law and order and on-going security
operations. As highlighted in the report issued on 15 April 2014 by OHCHR, short-term
human rights concerns should be addressed within the broader and longer term framework
that will see institutional reform and enable change that will impact on the enjoyment of
all rights – civil, cultural, economic, political, and social. The root causes of the current
crisis were initially due to the systematic and structural curtailment of human rights and
widespread corruption. The way out of the current crisis, to ensure reconciliation of
communities through peaceful and democratic means, will be through the accountability
for violations and the full respect and guarantee of all human rights for all.
328. With the election of President Poroshenko, there is the opportunity for the Government of

Ukraine to prioritise addressing these systemic and structural concerns through
institutional reform focusing on human rights challenges in the short-term, and
progressively paving the way for the establishment of a system that promotes and protects
human rights for all, ensures justice, good governance and the rule of law through
inclusive, non-discriminatory and participatory means. A comprehensive national human
rights action plan reflecting all recommendations from the international and regional
mechanisms is highly recommended, as well as the creation by the Government of a senior
level coordination mechanism of implementation open to state institutions, civil society

55

and having the combined support of the UN, regional organisations and the international
community.
329. Recommendations have been made below on Crimea to both the authorities in Crimea and

the Russian Federation, which exercises de facto control over the peninsula. With the
negative impact of the current situation, including the legal uncertainty, on the full
enjoyment of human rights by the residents of Crimea, the HRMMU is advocating for the
legal framework of Ukraine to remain in force, considering the adverse human rights
impact of legislative changes imposed and also bearing in mind UN General Assembly
resolution 68/262.
330. The recommendations should be read in conjunction with - and seen as complimentary to

– those outlined in the OHCHR reports on the human rights situation in Ukraine, issued on
15 April and 16 May 2014, which have not yet been fully implemented.
331. The HRMMU takes note of the joint report by the OSCE Office for Democratic

Institutions and Human Rights and the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities
issued on 12 May 2014, and calls upon all relevant parties to implement its
recommendations.
To the Government of Ukraine and other stakeholders
a)

There should be constitutional inclusive and meaningful consultations with all political
parties, regardless of their ideology, as well as representatives of civil society and
minority (national and ethnic, linguistic, religious and other) groups and indigenous
peoples in order to embrace all components of society, including women in the
dialogue for the new constitution, which will reflect the new reality of the country with
a full-fledged system of checks and balances. The peaceful population of the east
should participate in these consultations.

b)

As a representative body of the country, the Parliament should reflect the new political
and social reality of the country; therefore there is a need for new parliamentary
elections.

c)

All armed groups must immediately put an end to their violent activities and lay down
their arms.

d)

The Government must ensure that its armed forces refrain from using excessive force,
and ensure that its ongoing security operations are at all times in line with the relevant
international standards applicable to different types of operations. In all circumstances,
it must ensure the protection of those who are not involved in the fighting.

e)

All people detained in the context of the security operations should be treated in line
with international norms and standards and guaranteed their human rights under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and other applicable bodies of
international law. In order to protect its security personnel and persons not involved in
the fighting, the Government should consider providing assurances that acts of
abduction and detention by armed groups will not be prosecuted provided that they do
not target people not involved in the fighting and the victims are treated humanely at all
times.

f)

The role and position of the Ombudsperson and National Preventive Mechanism, as the
main bodies / institutions working towards the strengthening of the national human
rights system and the protection and guarantee of human rights for all, should be
enhanced.

56

g)

All gaps of legislation should be brought in line with the recommendations of the
international human rights mechanisms (treaty bodies, universal periodic review and
special procedures); the Judiciary, Office of the Prosecutor General and the Bar
Association should operate in line with relevant international norms and standards in
order to ensure fair trial without which it is impossible to tackle corruption.

h)

The Constitutional Court should be enhanced – legal, social and all other guarantees
need to be elaborated in order to ensure the genuine independence of the Constitutional
Court.

i)

The State Migration Service should propose amendments to bring the refugee law in
line with international standards, and to allocate sufficient funds to ensure due process
in the asylum procedure, as well as reception conditions meeting humanitarian needs.

j)

A language law should be adopted in line with international standards that enables the
promotion of the official national language as well as other languages.

k)

A central authority should be established to respond to the humanitarian needs of IDPs,
including by establishing a comprehensive registration system, formulation of
legislative and regulatory acts to ease access to important social and economic rights,
establishing public assistance programmes, mobilization and coordination of civil
society-initiated relief efforts, and cooperation with international donors and technical
assistance.

l)

All stakeholders should refrain from using messages of intolerance or expressions,
which may incite hatred, violence, hostility, discrimination or radicalisation.

m)

Access for international organisations to the areas affected in eastern Ukraine by the
security operations (urban areas in the epicentre of the fighting) should be facilitated so
that the real needs of the population can be assessed and addressed.

n)

Normative acts to ensure freedom of movement for residents of Crimea should be
enacted as soon as possible.
To the authorities in Crimea and the de facto governing authority of the Russian
Federation

o)

Reaffirming UN General Assembly resolution 68/262, entitled “Territorial integrity of
Ukraine”, measures must be taken to protect the rights of persons affected by the
changing institutional and legal framework, including on issues related to citizenship,
right of residence, labour rights, property and land rights, access to health and
education.

p)

Journalists, human rights defenders and individuals must be able to fully exercise their
right to freedom of expression, in accordance with Article 19 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

q)

Ukrainian legislation should remain in force, considering the adverse human rights
impact of legislative changes imposed and also bearing in mind UN General Assembly
resolution 68/262.

r)

Intimidation, harassment and abductions of residents must stop, with guarantees
ensured for the respect for the right to life, liberty and security

s)

Criminal and administrative liability should not be used as a mechanism of intimidation
against Crimean Tatars and other residents of Crimea, but used in line with
international law.

57

t)

Human rights violations should be independently, promptly and comprehensively
investigated and perpetrators brought to justice.

u)

All forms of intimidation and harassment of religious communities must be put to an
end and all incidents, including those where there have been attacks on Ukrainian
Orthodox Church, Greek Catholic Church and the Muslim community must be properly
investigated, thus enabling the effective promotion and protection of the freedom of
religion or belief.

v)

The promotion and protection of the rights of national minorities, including the
Crimean Tatars and other indigenous peoples must be ensured, enabling them to
participate fully and inclusively in public and political life.

w)

The deployment of independent and impartial human rights monitors, including by the
HRMMU, should be agreed upon.

58

