

Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly: The conflict in Chechnya - Recommendation 1444 (2000) - Russian Federation | ReliefWeb

Skip to main content

Help

Log in

ReliefWeb

Content Search

What are you looking for?

Search|t

Updates

Countries

Disasters

Organizations

Topics

Jobs

Training

Informing humanitarians worldwide 24/7 — 
a service provided by 
UN OCHA

Russia

Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly: The conflict in Chechnya - Recommendation 1444 (2000)

Format

 UN Document 

Source

COE

Posted

27 Jan 2000

Originally published

27 Jan 2000

Provisional edition

The conflict in Chechnya

Recommendation 1444 (2000)
1

1. The Assembly recalls its Resolution
1201 (1999) of 4 November 1999 on the conflict in Chechnya calling on Russia
to avoid military raids against the civil population, to introduce a cease-fire
and to start a peaceful dialogue with the elected Chechen authorities,
as well as requesting that persons guilty of terrorist acts, human rights
violations and abductions be prosecuted and all hostages be immediately
liberated.

2. It also recalls the declaration of
the Parliamentary Assembly's Bureau on the situation in Chechnya of 13
December 1999 according to which « persistence in violations could lead
the Parliamentary Assembly to put under question Russian participation
in the Assembly's work and in the Council of Europe in general » and takes
note of the findings of its delegation during its recent visit to Moscow,
Dagestan, Chechnya and Ingushetia (16-20 January 2000).

3. Upon admission in 1996, Russia committed
itself to settle internal as well as international disputes by peaceful
means and to respect strictly the provisions of international humanitarian
law, including cases of armed conflict on its territory. 

4. As a member of the Council of Europe,
Russia is obliged to ensure respect of the European Convention on Human
Rights as well as the rule of law and democratic principles on the whole
of its territory, including Chechnya.

5. The Assembly recognises the right
of Russia to preserve its territorial integrity, to fight terrorism and
crime and to protect its population, including the population of Chechnya
and neighbouring republics and regions, from terrorist attacks and acts
of banditism. The Assembly confirms its strong condemnation of all acts
of terrorism, kidnappings, public executions and human rights violations
committed in Chechnya. 

6. Nevertheless, it stresses that the
means used to achieve such goals must be in accordance with the international
commitments of Russia and must exclude, in particular, indiscriminate and
disproportionate use of force affecting the civil population.

7. The Assembly condemns, as totally
unacceptable, the current conduct of military operations in Chechnya with
its tragic consequences for large numbers of the civil population of this
republic. As a result of this indiscriminate and disproportionate use of
force, innocent non-combatants in Chechnya are suffering most serious violations
of such fundamental human rights as the right to life, the right to liberty
and the right to security.

8. Russia is thus found to be violating
some of her most important obligations under both the European Convention
on Human Rights and international humanitarian law, as well as the commitments
she entered into upon accession to the Council of Europe.

9. The Assembly considers that the military
operations of the Russian Federal forces in Chechnya violate the rule of
law, since the scale of these operations is not covered by the law on the
fight against organised crime but no emergency situation was declared,
so that the operations are arbitrary and not regulated by law.

10. The Assembly regrets that during
the period 1996-1999 the Chechen leadership was unable to ensure the rule
of law and respect for fundamental human rights and individual freedoms
in Chechnya.

11. The Assembly demands that the Chechen
side introduce and immediate and complete cease-fire and urges the Chechen
elected representatives to ensure the release of all hostages, to stop
all acts of terrorism and violence emanating from the Chechen side and
to bring to justice the authors of these acts, as well as to ensure the
respect of democratic standards on the territories under their control.

12. The Assembly reiterates its support
for all efforts aimed at restoring the rule of law and respect of democratic
principles in Chechnya as well as the social and economic structures of
this Republic, as long as they are in accordance with internationally accepted
norms and standards.

13. The Assembly recognises the deep
rooted historical origins of the conflict and is convinced that a lasting
and viable solution can only be based on the rejection of violence and
the consent of both a convincing majority of the people and all the key
parties to the conflict.

14. The Assembly notes with some satisfaction
that the acting President of Russia, Mr Vladimir Putin, has accepted the
proposal for a Council of Europe presence in the region. Its objective
should be to monitor, in co-operation with the Russian authorities, the
human rights and humanitarian situation and to make proposals in this regard.

15. It also welcomes the willingness
of Russia to co-operate with the Council of Europe in the solution of this
conflict and to take into consideration the proposals of the Organisation
in this regard.

16. The Assembly calls on Russia:

i. to introduce an immediate and complete
cease-fire and, in particular, to stop immediately all indiscriminate and
disproportionate military action in Chechnya, including use of young conscripts
and to cease all attacks against the civilian population ;

ii. to start immediately a political
dialogue, without pre-conditions, with the elected Chechen authorities,
with the objective of securing a complete cease-fire and achieving a comprehensive
political solution to the conflict;

iii. to allow those wishing to leave
Chechnya to do so in full security and dignity, regardless of their sex
or age, and to ensure that they subsequently receive proper protection
and support;

iv. to refrain from any forced repatriations
to Chechnya;

v. to respect strictly the fundamental
human rights of the civilian population in the territories of Chechnya
under its control, in particular with regard to human rights violations
and harassment by the military and police forces ;

vi. to allow for the unhindered delivery
of international humanitarian assistance and for the effective operation
of international governmental and non-governmental humanitarian organisations
in the region;

vii. to ensure free access by Russian
and international media to the region;

viii. to discuss with competent international
organisations, including the Council of Europe, the ways in which they
can contribute to the political solution of the conflict;

ix. to initiate a regional dialogue on
the peaceful solution of the Chechen conflict, with the participation of
representatives of Chechnya, Dagestan, Ingushetia and North Ossetia, as
well as with competent international organisations, including the Council
of Europe.

x. to ask the Russian Federation
to guarantee the full application of a fundamental aspect of democracy,
namely the entire and independent operation of the media.

17. The Assembly recommends that the
Committee of Ministers:

i. transmits to the government of Russia
this Assembly recommendation and requests the Chairman of the Committee
of Ministers to initiate immediately the necessary action to ensure its
implementation; 

ii. takes rapidly, in close co-operation
with the Russian authorities, the necessary measures designed to ensure
a Council of Europe presence in the region, respecting the activities of
other international organisations;

iii. considers the question of human
rights violations in the Chechnya conflict at its next meeting in order
to take the necessary actions within its statutory powers; 

iv. reviews, in close co-operation with
the Russian authorities, the Council of Europe assistance and co-operation
programmes with Russia, to ensure that they help and do not in any way
directly or indirectly inhibit a solution to the conflict;

v. provides appropriate support to the
Russian authorities for the implementation of peaceful policies in conformity
with the norms and principles of the Council of Europe, intended to normalise
the situation in Chechnya, with particular regard to setting up local authorities,
registration of the population, and ensuring that financial and material
support effectively reaches those for whom it is intended;

vi. plays an active role in preparing,
in co-operation with the Russian authorities, a regional conference with
the participation of Chechnya, Dagestan, Ingushetia and North Ossetia,
as well as competent international organisations, including the Council
of Europe, to co-ordinate supportive actions for a permanent solution for
the situation in Chechnya;

vii. calls upon its member states to
take effective measures to control the flow of arms into the area of North
Caucasus.

18. The Assembly resolves to monitor
closely respect for the requirements set out in paragraph 16 of this recommendation,
at the same time emphasising that failure to meet them will inevitably
necessitate, at the Assembly's April 2000 part-session, a review of Russian
continued membership of, and participation in, the Assembly's work and
in the Council of Europe in general. The Assembly therefore calls upon
the Political Affairs Committee, the Migration, Refugees and Demography
Committee, the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights and the Monitoring
Committee to make arrangements for rapporteurs to revisit the region before
the April Assembly's part-session in order to report on whether such a
review is necessary. 

1.
 Assembly debate
on 27 January 2000 (6th and 7th Sittings). See Doc. 8630, report of the
Political Affairs Committee (Rapporteur: Lord Judd), Doc. 8631, opinion
of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Human Rights (Rapporteur: Mr Bindig)
and Doc. 8632, opinion of the Committee on Migration, Refugees and Demography
(Rapporteur: Mr Iwinski). Text adopted by the Assembly on 27 January 2000
(7th Sitting).

Report details

Primary country

Russian Federation

Source

Council of Europe

Format

UN Document

Language

English

Share

Share this on Facebook

Share this on X

Post this on LinkedIn

Share report link

Related Content

World

Weekly Epidemiological Record (WER), 25 January 2025, Vol. 100, No 4, 2025, 21- 32 [EN/FR]

Format

 Analysis 

Source

WHO

Posted

24 Jan 2025

Originally published

24 Jan 2025

World

25 países redujeron a la mitad la pobreza multidimensional en un periodo de 15 años, aunque todavía hay 1.100 millones de personas en situación de pobreza

Format

 News and Press Release 

Source

UNDP

Posted

11 Jul 2023

Originally published

11 Jul 2023

Philippines

Philippines Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Situation Report #100, 25 April 2022

Format

 Situation Report 

Source

WHO

Posted

9 May 2022

Originally published

9 May 2022

Afghanistan

Afghanistan: Health Facilities Profiling of Observed Security Incidents for the Period 2013-2014 - 100 meters range (as of 25 Oct 2014)

Format

 Map 

Source

iMMAP Inc.

Posted

27 Oct 2014

Originally published

25 Oct 2014

Blog

Labs

About Us

Terms

Contact

Facebook

X

LinkedIn

OCHA Services

Related Platforms

Humanitarian Action

Central Emergency Response Fund

Other OCHA Services

Financial Tracking Service

Humanitarian Data Exchange

ReliefWeb Response

Inter-Agency Standing Committee

OCHA website

ReliefWeb

Virtual OSOCC

 More OCHA Services

Opens in a new window

Service provided by

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

UN OCHA

United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

 OCHA coordinates the global emergency response to save lives and protect people in humanitarian crises. We advocate for effective and principled humanitarian action by all, for all.

ReliefWeb's Terms & Conditions.

© 2026 all rights reserved.

