UNITED NATIONS
Security Council
S/26118
20 July 1993
Distr. GENERAL
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH

Source: https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/170205 (file S_26118-EN.pdf)

                    NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

     After consultations among members of the Security Council, the President of
the Council made the following statement, on behalf of the Council, at its
3256th meeting, on 20 July 1993, in connection with the Council's consideration
of the item entitled "Complaint by Ukraine regarding the Decree of the Supreme
Soviet of the Russian Federation concerning Sevastopol":

     "The Security Council has considered the letter dated 13 and
16 July 1993 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the President
of the Council (S/26075 and S/26100), transmitting a statement by the
President of Ukraine on the Decree adopted by the Supreme Soviet of the
Russian Federation on 9 July 1993 concerning Sevastopol and a letter from
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine on the same matter.

     "The Security Council has also considered the letter dated
19 July 1993 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
(S/26109), circulating a statement by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of
the Russian Federation concerning the aforementioned Decree.

     "The Security Council shares the deep concern, and welcomes the
position, expressed by the President and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Ukraine concerning the Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian
Federation. In this context, it also welcomes the position taken by the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs on behalf of the Government of the Russian
Federation.

     "The Security Council reaffirms in this connection its commitment to
the territorial integrity of Ukraine, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. The Security Council recalls that in the Treaty between
the Russian Federation and Ukraine, signed at Kiev on 19 November 1990, the
High Contracting Parties committed themselves to respect each other's
territorial integrity within their currently existing frontiers. The
Decree of the Supreme Soviet of the Russian Federation is incompatible with
this commitment as well as with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, and without effect.

     "The Security Council welcomes the efforts of the Presidents and the
Governments of the Russian Federation and Ukraine to settle any differences
between them by peaceful means and urges that they take all steps to ensure
the avoidance of tension.

     "The Security Council will remain seized of the matter."

                                    -----

93-40763 (E)   200793
