Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights

Situation of human rights in the temporarily
occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the
city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)

Contents
Paragraphs

Page

I.

Executive summary .................................................................................................

1–19

1

II.

Introduction .............................................................................................................

20–29

3

III.

Methodology ...........................................................................................................

30–35

5

IV.

Application of international law ..............................................................................

36–45

5

1. International human rights law ...................................................................

37–41

6

2. International humanitarian law ...................................................................

42–45

6

V.

Population data and movements ..............................................................................

46–54

7

VI.

Civil and Political Rights ........................................................................................

55–169

8

A.

Right to nationality .........................................................................................

55–72

8

1. Ukrainian citizens having Crimean residency registration who rejected Russian
Federation citizenship .....................................................................................

58–63

8

2. Ukrainian citizens without Crimean residency registration who are excluded from
Russian Federation citizenship .......................................................................
64–70

9

3. Ukrainian citizens who were made to renounce Ukrainian citizenship ......

71–72

10

B.

Administration of justice and fair trial rights ..................................................

73–79

10

C.

Right to life .....................................................................................................

80–83

11

D.

Right to physical and mental integrity ............................................................

84–92

12

E.

Right to liberty and security ...........................................................................

93–104

13

1. Arbitrary arrests and detentions ...............................................................

94–98

13

2. Enforced disappearances ..........................................................................

99-104

14

F.

Right to private and family life .......................................................................

105–110

15

G.

Rights of detainees..........................................................................................

111–119

15

1. Violations of the rights of prisoners in Crimea ...........................................

112–115

16

2. Transfer of prisoners to the Russian Federation .........................................

116–119

16

H.

Forced enlistment ..........................................................................................

120–122

17

I.

Freedom of movement ....................................................................................

123–135

17

1. Restrictions imposed by the Russian Federation ........................................

125–128

17

2. Restrictions imposed by Ukraine ................................................................

129–135

18

J.

Freedom of thought, conscience and religion .................................................

136–145

19

K.

Freedom of peaceful assembly .......................................................................

146–153

20

L.

Freedom of opinion and expression ................................................................

154–161

21

M.

Freedom of association ...................................................................................

162–169

23

Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ....................................................................

170–219

24

A.

Property rights ................................................................................................

170–181

24

1. Nationalization of property .........................................................................

171–176

24

2. Housing, land and property of formerly deported people ...........................

177–181

24

VII.

I

B.

Right to maintain one’s identity, culture and tradition ...................................

182–191

25

culture and identity .........................................................................................

183–186

25

2. The ban of the Mejlis ..................................................................................

187–193

26

C.

Right to education in one’s native language ...................................................

194–201

27

D.

Right to health ................................................................................................

202–214

28

1. Medical staff deficit in public hospitals ......................................................

204–208

28

2. Impaired treatment of drug users ................................................................

209–214

29

Access to water and other essential services ...................................................

215–219

29

VIII.

Conclusions and Recommendations .......................................................................

220–226

30

IX.

End notes ................................................................................................................

1. Limitations of the right of Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars to express their

E.

II

i

I.

Executive Summary
1.
On 14 March 2014, following a request of the Government of Ukraine addressed
to the United Nations Secretary-General to establish a human rights mission in Ukraine, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) deployed a
Human Rights Monitoring Mission in Ukraine (HRMMU). Since then, HRMMU has been
collecting and analyzing information on the human rights situation throughout Ukraine,
including in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol 1 on the basis of
United Nations General Assembly resolutions 68/262, reaffirming the territorial integrity of
Ukraine and 71/205 referring to the Crimean peninsula as Ukrainian territory temporarily
occupied2 by the Russian Federation. According to the Constitution of Ukraine, Crimea and
the city of Sevastopol are separate administrative units of the Crimean peninsula having
their own governing institutions.
2.
The present report was developed based on the mandate of OHCHR and
HRMMU, but also following a request by General Assembly resolution 71/2053 on the
“Situation of human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol (Ukraine)” for a dedicated thematic report of OHCHR on the “situation of
human rights in the temporarily occupied Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol”. The report covers the period from 22 February 2014 to 12 September 2017.
HRMMU has not been provided access to Crimea by Russian Federation authorities since
its former Head of Mission accompanied the former Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Ivan Šimonović, on 21-22 March 2014. As a result, it has been monitoring human
rights developments in Crimea from mainland Ukraine.
3.
Pro-Russian groups in Crimea rejected the ousting by Parliament of former
President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych on 22 February 2014, criticizing it as an
unconstitutional change of power. One of these groups was the ‘people’s militia’, a local
paramilitary formation created on 23 February 2014, and commonly referred to as the
‘Crimean self-defence’.4 With the support of Russian Federation troops5, the Crimean selfdefence blocked key infrastructure, airports and military installations and took control of
strategic facilities. It has been accused of committing numerous human rights abuses with
impunity since the end of February 2014.
4.
The President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin stated that in a meeting
with heads of security agencies during the night of 22 and 23 February 2014 he took the
decision to “start working on the return of Crimea to the Russian Federation”.6
5.
On 27 February 2014, uniformed men without insignia took control of the
Parliament of Crimea. On the same day, the Parliament of Crimea dismissed the
Government of Crimea. On 11 March 2014, the Parliaments of Crimea and Sevastopol
adopted a joint Declaration of Independence stating that Crimea and Sevastopol will unite
to form an independent state - the ”Republic of Crimea” - and seek integration into the
Russian Federation if Crimean residents choose to join the Russian Federation at a
referendum scheduled for 16 March.7 According to the pro-Russian authorities in Crimea, a
large majority of voters backed Crimea’s “incorporation” into the Russian Federation. The
referendum was declared invalid by the Government of Ukraine and the United Nations
General Assembly. The United Nations Secretary-General Ban-Ki Moon expressed “deep
concern and disappointment”, adding that the referendum would only exacerbate an
“already complex and tense situation”.8 Subsequently, the Russian Federation and the
“Republic of Crimea” signed on 18 March 2014 a “treaty of accession” effectively
annexing the peninsula into the Russian Federation.
6.
One consequence of this development was the imposition of Russian Federation
citizenship on residents of Crimea. This has resulted in regressive effects on the enjoyment
of human rights, particularly for those who refused to automatically adopt Russian

1

Federation citizenship, were ineligible to obtain it, or were required to forfeit their
Ukrainian citizenship in order to remain employed.
7.
Since the beginning of occupation, Ukrainian laws were substituted by Russian
Federation laws, in violation of the obligation under international humanitarian law to
respect the existing law of the occupied territory. 9 Among other implications, this led to the
arbitrary implementation of Russian Federation criminal law provisions designed to fight
terrorism, extremism and separatism, which have restricted the right to liberty and security
of the person and the space for the enjoyment of fundamental freedoms.
8.
Laws and judicial decisions deriving from the implementation of the legal
framework of the Russian Federation in Crimea have further undermined the exercise of
fundamental freedoms. Mandatory re-registration requirements were imposed on NGOs,
media outlets and religious communities in Crimea. Russian Federation authorities have
denied a number of them the right to re-register, generally on procedural grounds, raising
concerns about the use of legal norms and procedures to silence dissent or criticism.
9.
Most affected by these restrictions were individuals opposed to the March 2014
referendum or criticizing Russian Federation control of Crimea, such as journalists,
bloggers, supporters of the Mejlis,10 pro-Ukrainian and Maidan activists, as well as persons
with no declared political affiliation but advocating strict compliance with the tenets of
Islam, who are often accused of belonging to extremist groups banned in the Russian
Federation, such as Hizb ut-Tahrir. The rights of these people to freedom of opinion and
expression, association, peaceful assembly, movement, thought, conscience and religion,
were obstructed through acts of intimidation, pressure, physical attacks, warnings as well as
harassment through judicial measures, including prohibitions, house searches, detentions
and sanctions.
10.
Russian Federation justice system applied in Crimea often failed to uphold fair
trial rights and due process guarantees. Court decisions have confirmed actions, decisions
and requests of investigating or prosecuting bodies, seemingly without proper judicial
oversight. Courts frequently ignored credible claims of human rights violations occurring in
detention. Judges have applied Russian Federation criminal law provisions to a wide variety
of peaceful assemblies, speech and activities, and in some cases retroactively to events that
preceded the temporary occupation of Crimea or occurred outside of the peninsula in
mainland Ukraine.
11.
Grave human rights violations, such as arbitrary arrests and detentions, enforced
disappearances, ill-treatment and torture, and at least one extra-judicial execution were
documented. For a three-week period following the overthrow of Ukrainian authorities in
Crimea, human rights abuses occurring on the peninsula were attributed to members of the
Crimean self-defence and various Cossack groups. Following Crimea’s temporary
occupation, on 18 March 2014, representatives of the Crimean Federal Security Service of
the Russian Federation (FSB) and police were more frequently mentioned as perpetrators.
12.
While those human rights violations and abuses have affected Crimean residents
of diverse ethnic backgrounds, Crimean Tatars were particularly targeted especially those
with links to the Mejlis, which boycotted the March 2014 referendum and initiated public
protests in favour of Crimea remaining a part of Ukraine. Intrusive law enforcement raids
of private properties have also disproportionately affected the Crimean Tatars and
interfered with their right to privacy under the justification of fighting extremism.
Furthermore, the ban of the Mejlis, imposed in April 2016 by the Supreme Court of
Crimea, has infringed on the civil, political and cultural rights of Crimean Tatars.
13.
The Russian Federation authorities in Crimea have failed to effectively
investigate most allegations of human rights violations committed by the security forces or
armed groups acting under the direction or control of the State. Failure to prosecute these
acts and ensure accountability has denied victims proper remedy and strengthened
impunity, potentially encouraging the continued perpetration of human rights violations.

2

14.
Since the beginning of the temporary occupation, all penitentiary institutions in
Crimea have been integrated into the penitentiary system of the Russian Federation, leading
to numerous transfers of detainees from Crimea to penal colonies in the Russian Federation,
contrary to provisions of international humanitarian law. 11
15.
Restrictions affecting freedom of movement to and from Crimea have been
imposed by the Russian Federation and Ukraine on the grounds of security or pursuant to
immigration rules. They include five-year exiles, deportations, prohibitions on entry of
individuals and public transportation, non-recognition of documents, and restrictive
regulations applicable to travel of children and transportation of personal belongings.
16.
Large scale expropriation of public and private property has been conducted
without compensation or regard for international humanitarian law provisions protecting
property from seizures or destruction. Crimean Tatars who returned from deportation in the
1990s and built their houses on land plots without obtaining construction permits remain at
risk of seeing their security of tenure contested and being forcibly evicted.
17.
The space for public manifestation of Ukrainian culture and identity has shrunk
significantly. Groups manifesting their attachment to national symbols, dates or historic
figures have been issued warnings or sanctioned by courts for violating public order or
conducting unauthorized rallies. Education in the Ukrainian language has almost
disappeared from Crimea, jeopardizing one of the pillars of an individual’s identity and
cultural affiliation.
18.
The availability of health services in free-of-charge State medical institutions has
been impaired since March 2014 due to the numerous departures of doctors and other
medical staff to more lucrative private sector institutions in Crimea. This has resulted in
delayed treatment of the most economically disadvantaged, jeopardizing their right to life
and health. Retrogressive measures stemming from the implementation of Russian
Federation legislation have affected people suffering from drug dependence.
19.
The right of the Crimean population to an adequate standard of living has been
affected by measures taken by Ukrainian authorities or implemented on mainland Ukraine,
including the interruption of water and energy supplies to the peninsula. Under international
humanitarian law, the Russian Federation as the occupying power is obliged to ensure to
the fullest extent of the means available to it sufficient hygiene and public health standards,
as well as the provision of food and medical care to the population. At the same time, this
does not exonerate Ukraine from its obligations under the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights not to interfere with the enjoyment of the rights it
enshrines, and from respecting the requirement under international humanitarian law to
ensure that the basic needs of the population continue to be met under conditions of
occupation.

II.

Introduction
20.
The political events that marked the Maidan protests in Kyiv, and culminated in
the departure, on 21 February 2014, of then President of Ukraine Viktor Yanukovych and
the establishment of an interim Government of Ukraine on 23 February, affected Crimea.
The Crimean peninsula had also been the theatre of pro- and larger anti-Maidan rallies
since December 2013.12
21.
The President of the Russian Federation Vladimir Putin stated that in a meeting
with heads of security agencies during the night of 22 and 23 February 2014 he took the
decision to “start working on the return of Crimea to the Russian Federation”. 13

3

22.
On 23 February 2014, demonstrations in Sevastopol led to the resignation of the
Kyiv-appointed authorities and the installation by the local parliament of a pro-Russian
“People’s Mayor” on 24 February. 14
23.
In Simferopol, the capital of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, supporters of
Ukrainian unity, mainly Crimean Tatars, clashed on 26 February with pro-Russian residents
in front of the parliament. A stampede left two people dead and some 70 injured. On the
following night, armed groups without insignia took over the buildings of the local
government and parliament. On 27 February, members of the Parliament of Crimea, in the
presence of gunmen, dismissed the local Government and elected Sergey Aksenov as the
Head of Crimea.15
24.
On 6 March 2014, the Parliament of Crimea adopted a resolution calling for a
referendum16 on the status of the peninsula, to be held on 16 March 2014, basing the
decision on the “absence of legitimate State organs in Ukraine”. 17 In an Opinion18
concerning the compatibility of this resolution with constitutional principles, the European
Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) of the Council of Europe
noted that the referendum violated the Constitution of Ukraine, and asserted that
circumstances in Crimea did not allow for a referendum to be held in line with European
democratic standards.19 On 17 March 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban-Ki
Moon regretted that the referendum would only exacerbate an “already complex and tense
situation”20. Furthermore, during his mission to Crimea on 21 and 22 March 2014, former
UN Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović received information on
alleged cases of non-Ukrainian citizens participating in the referendum, as well as
individuals voting numerous times in different locations.21
25.
According to the pro-Russian authorities in Crimea, an overwhelming majority of
the Crimean population voted in favour of joining the Russian Federation. Opponents
boycotted the poll, considering it as unlawful.22 The authorities of Ukraine declared these
developments unconstitutional and terminated the powers of Crimean institutions. 23
26.
On 18 March 2014 a “Treaty on the Accession of the Republic of Crimea to the
Russian Federation” (“Treaty on Accession”) was signed in Moscow, and on 21 March
2014, the Parliament of the Russian Federation ratified a Constitutional Law “On the
Accession of the Republic of Crimea to the Russian Federation and the Creation of the New
Constituent Entities of the Republic of Crimea and the City of Federal Importance
Sevastopol within the Russian Federation”.
27.
On 15 April 2014, the Parliament of Ukraine passed a law designed to regulate
legal aspects related to the temporary occupation of Crimea.24 It defines principles applying
to legal and property rights, economic activity, social rights and benefits, freedom of
movement, and compensation for damages incurred from the temporary occupation.
28.
The General Assembly of the United Nations adopted two resolutions on Crimea.
Resolution 68/26225 on the “Territorial integrity of Ukraine” of 27 March 2014 states that
the March 2014 referendum has “no validity” and cannot form the basis for any alteration
of the status of Crimea. Resolution 71/205 on the “Situation of human rights in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol (Ukraine)”, adopted on 19
December 201626, refers to Crimea as being under the “temporary occupation” of the
Russian Federation. It calls on the latter to abide by the Geneva Conventions. It also urges
the Russian Federation to ensure proper and unimpeded access of international human
rights monitoring missions and human rights non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to
the peninsula, and requests the United Nations Secretary-General to seek ways and means
to ensure safe and unfettered access to Crimea by established regional and international
human rights monitoring mechanisms. In addition, it requests the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) to prepare a dedicated thematic
report on the human rights situation in Crimea.

4

29.
The present report was developed pursuant to General Assembly Resolution
71/205, and covers the period between 22 February 2014 and 12 September 2017. Since the
adoption of this resolution, OHCHR has been analyzing incidents occurring in Crimea
based on an international humanitarian law framework, as well as against international
human rights standards.

III.

Methodology
30.
HRMMU has a mandate inter alia to monitor and publicly report on the human
rights situation in Ukraine through teams based in various locations, including through a
presence in Crimea’s capital, Simferopol.27
31.
Former Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan Šimonović was the
last United Nations official to visit the Crimean peninsula, on 21 and 22 March 2014. 28
32.
On 18 September 2014, a letter addressed by HRMMU to the Head of Crimea
requested the opportunity to establish a sub-office in Simferopol, in line with its mandate
and General Assembly resolution 68/262. The response, received on 8 October 2014, stated
that HRMMU had been deployed on the territory of Ukraine upon the invitation of the
Government of Ukraine; that Crimea was part of the Russian Federation; and that questions
of international relations were not within the competence of Crimean institutions.
33.
On 20 April 2017, following consultations with the Government of Ukraine,
OHCHR informed the Government of the Russian Federation of its intention to send a
mission of HRMMU to Crimea in order to prepare the report on the human rights situation
in Crimea requested by General Assembly resolution 71/205. While no formal response
was received, OHCHR was notified informally that it would not be granted access to
Crimea due to its mandate covering Ukraine and that any OHCHR mission would need to
be agreed upon directly with the Russian Federation authorities. A second notification
mentioning an OHCHR mission to Crimea, addressed to the Russian Federation on 13 June
2017, remained unanswered at the closing date of the present report.
34.
In response, the Government of Ukraine, in its Notes Verbales of 30 March 2017,
19 July 2017, 28 July 2017 and 7 September 2017, reaffirmed its position on the need to
ensure safe and unfettered access to the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of
Sevastopol by established regional and international human rights monitoring mechanisms
to enable them to carry out their mandate, expressed its readiness to provide HRMMU with
full freedom of movement throughout Ukraine, and confirmed its strong commitment to
properly implement resolution 71/205 of the United Nations General Assembly.
35.
Given the lack of access to Crimea, HRMMU has monitored the human rights
situation in the peninsula from its presence in mainland Ukraine. HRMMU systematically
collects and analyzes information gathered through direct interviews and fact-finding
missions, including at the Administrative Boundary Line (ABL) between mainland Ukraine
and Crimea. This report only describes allegations of human rights violations and abuses
and violations of international humanitarian law that OHCHR could verify and corroborate
in accordance with its methodology. OHCHR is committed to the protection of its sources
and systematically assesses the potential risks of harm and retaliation against them.29

IV.

Application of International Law
36.
International human rights and humanitarian law are complementary bodies of
international law. In the case of occupation, humanitarian law and human rights law apply
concurrently and place protection obligations both on the occupying power and the State
whose territory is under occupation.

5

1.

International Human Rights Law
37.
Human rights are guaranteed by international treaties and agreements, as well as
customary law, which apply at all times, regardless of peace or war.
38.
Under international law, the Russian Federation must respect its obligations under
international human rights law in Crimea from the moment it acquired “effective control”
over the territory.30
39.
Ukraine considers that the occupation of Crimea started on 20 February 2014 31
and denies having human rights obligations in relation to this territory from the moment it
lost effective control over the peninsula. On 14 May 2015, the Parliament of Ukraine
adopted a Declaration on Derogation32 stating that the Russian Federation “shall bear full
responsibility for observance of human rights and performance of the respective
international obligations at the annexed and temporarily occupied territory.”
40.
On 19 April 2017, the Government of Ukraine established an Intergovernmental
Commission on derogation in order to review periodically the territorial application of the
derogation. Its mandate includes the review of the necessity and proportionality of
derogation measures and making proposals to the Government on the continuation and
scope of the derogation.
41.
OHCHR notes that States are allowed, in exceptional circumstances, namely in
times of public emergency threatening the life of the nation, to adjust their obligations
temporally under a treaty. However, under the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, States have a continuing obligation to ensure respect for the rights recognized in the
Covenant in relation to the population of a territory controlled by de facto authorities or
armed groups within the limits of their effective power. 33 Similarly, under the case law of
the European Court of Human Rights, a State that has lost effective control over a part of its
territory is nevertheless obliged under Article 1 of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms to use all the legal and diplomatic
means available to continue to guarantee the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms defined
in the Convention to those living there, as the region is recognized under public
international law as part of its territory.34

2.

International Humanitarian Law
42.
Both the Russian Federation and Ukraine are parties to the 1907 Hague
Regulations, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, and the 1977 Additional Protocol I to
the 1949 Geneva Conventions. This body of international law provides the primary basis
for rules governing occupation. The legal regime of an occupied territory is also regulated
by international customary law.
43.
An occupying power does not acquire sovereignty over the occupied territory.
The occupying power must respect the laws in force in the occupied territory, unless they
constitute a threat to its security or an obstacle to the application of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.35
44.
Under international law, States are responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law attributable to them, including: violations committed by their organs,
including their armed forces; violations committed by persons or entities they have
empowered to exercise elements of governmental authority; violations committed by
persons or groups acting in fact on their instructions, or under their direction or control; and
violations committed by private persons or groups which they acknowledge and adopt as
their own.36
45.
In 2016, the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court found
Crimea to be under the occupation of the Russian Federation and stated it will apply an

6

international armed conflict legal framework to the analysis of facts and alleged crimes
perpetrated there.37

V.

Population data and movements
46.
According to the last census conducted in Ukraine, in 2001, 125 nationalities
lived on the Crimean peninsula, which had a population of 2,401,209 (2,024,056 in Crimea
and 377,153 in Sevastopol).38 The census enumerated the population by ethnicity, finding
the largest national groups in Crimea and Sevastopol to be Russians, numbering 1,450,394
(60.40 per cent); Ukrainians 576,647 (24.12 per cent); and Crimean Tatars 245,291 (12.26
per cent).
47.
There were also 35,157 Belarussians; 13,602 Tatars; 10,088 Armenians; 5,531
Jews; 4,562 Moldovans; 4,459 Poles; 4,377 Azeri; 3,087 Uzbeks; 3,036 Greeks; 3,027
Koreans; 2,790 Germans; 2,679 Chuvash; 2,594 Mordovians; 2,282 Bulgarians 2,137
Georgians; 1,905 Roma; and 1,192 Maris. In addition, 17,298 persons did not declare
themselves or belonged to ethnic groups numbering less than 1,000 individuals.
48.
In September 2014, the Russian Federation conducted a census on the peninsula,
which was not recognized by the Government of Ukraine.39 According to its results, the
population of Crimea and Sevastopol had decreased by 4.8 per cent since 2001, down to
2,284,769, albeit with differences between the two administrative units: in Crimea, the
population decreased by 6.5 per cent, to 1,891,465, while that of Sevastopol grew by 4.1
per cent, to 393,304.
49.
According to that same census, in the entire peninsula, the number of persons of
Russian nationality increased to 1,492,078 (65.31 per cent), the Ukrainians dropped to
344,515 (15.08 per cent) and the Crimean Tatars decreased to 232,340 (10.17 per cent). The
other communities diminished, except for the Tatars - a group culturally affiliated with the
Volga Tatars and the Crimean Tatars - whose numbers rose from 13,602 to 44,996.
50.
Since the beginning of the occupation, the displacement of residents of Crimea mostly ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars - had multiple causes, notably the refusal to
live under Russian Federation jurisdiction, fear of persecution on ethnic or religious
grounds, threats or reported attacks, avoiding military conscription in the Russian
Federation army and enrolling in Ukrainian education institutions.
51.
In April 2017, the State Emergency Service of Ukraine estimated the number of
internally displaced persons (IDPs) from Crimea living in mainland Ukraine at 22,822. 40
Ukrainian NGOs estimate that between 50,000 and 60,000 former Crimean residents could
be displaced in mainland Ukraine. 41
52.
The demographic structure of Crimea continues to change, mainly as a result of a
continuous influx of Russian Federation citizens into Crimea, which started after the 2014
referendum. Most of them are pensioners, public servants and servicemen with their
families. Around 13,200 IDPs fleeing the conflict in eastern Ukraine had taken refuge in
Crimea at the end of 2014.42
53.
According to the State Statistics Service of the Russian Federation, as of 1
January 2017, the population of the Crimean peninsula had increased by 56,152 since the
September 2014 census, to 2,340,921.43 During this period, the population of the city of
Sevastopol, where the Black Sea Fleet is based, rose from 393,304 to 428,753, which
constitutes an eight per cent increase.
54.
OHCHR recalls that the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection on
Civilian Persons in Time of War provides in Article 49 that “The Occupying Power shall
not deport or transfer parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies”.

7

VI.

Civil and Political Rights
A.

Right to nationality
55.
The adoption of the Treaty on Accession on 18 March 2014 had an immediate
consequence for the status of residents of Crimea and rights attached to it: all Ukrainian
citizens and stateless persons who were permanently residing on the peninsula, as
evidenced by a residency registration stamp in the passport, were automatically recognized
as citizens of the Russian Federation.44 An exception was made for persons who, within one
month of the entry into force of the treaty (i.e. by 18 April 2014), rejected Russian
Federation citizenship in writing.
56.
The automatic citizenship rule led to the emergence of three vulnerable groups:
those who rejected in writing Russian Federation citizenship; those who, for lack of a
residency registration in Crimea, did not meet the legal criteria to become Russian
Federation citizens; and those who had to renounce their Ukrainian citizenship to keep their
employment. As of May 2015, the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Russian
Federation (Ombudsperson) estimated that around 100,000 persons living in Crimea (about
4 per cent of the population) did not have Russian Federation citizenship. 45
57.
Imposing citizenship on the inhabitants of an occupied territory can be equated to
compelling them to swear allegiance to a power they may consider as hostile, which is
forbidden under the Fourth Geneva Convention.46 In addition to being in violation of
international humanitarian law, the automatic citizenship rule raises a number of important
concerns under international human rights law.

1.

Ukrainian citizens having Crimean residency registration who rejected Russian
Federation citizenship
58.
The procedure for rejecting Russian Federation citizenship, which had to be
completed by 18 April 2014, was marked by certain constraints: instructions from the
Russian Federal Migration Service (FMS) on the refusal procedure were only made
available on 1 April; information about FMS centres was not available until 4 April; only
two FMS centres were functioning on 9 April 2014; and some requirements in the
procedure evolved over time, such as the demand that both parents make the application on
behalf of their child.47
59.
After 18 April 2014, FMS reported that 3,427 permanent residents of Crimea had
applied to opt out of automatically obtaining Russian Federation citizenship.48
60.
Renouncing Russian Federation citizenship remains legally possible on the basis
of the 2002 law On Citizenship, except for people who were indicted, sentenced, have
outstanding obligations towards the Russian Federation, or have no other citizenship or
guarantee for the acquisition thereof.49
61.
Residents of Crimea who opted out of Russian Federation citizenship became
foreigners. They could obtain residency permits through a simplified procedure, giving
them certain rights enjoyed by Russian Federation citizens, such as the right to pension,
free health insurance, social allowances, and the right to exercise professions for which
Russian Federation citizenship is not a mandatory requirement.50
62.
However, overall, persons holding a residency permit and no Russian Federation
citizenship do not enjoy equality before the law and are deprived of important rights. They
cannot own agricultural land,51 vote and be elected, register a religious community, apply to
hold a public meeting, hold positions in the public administration and re-register their
private vehicle on the peninsula.52

8

63.
OHCHR documented some cases of Crimean residents who had rejected Russian
Federation citizenship and faced discrimination. For instance, a man from Simferopol was
subjected to regular psychological harassment by his employer for having renounced
Russian Federation citizenship. In 2016, after two years of being pushed by his employer to
take back his formal rejection of Russian Federation citizenship, he was dismissed after
being told that his “anti-Russian” position disqualified him from continued employment.53
Two of his colleagues were also dismissed, including one who rejected Russian Federation
citizenship, and another who took up Russian Federation citizenship but publicly expressed
pro-Ukrainian views.

2.

Ukrainian citizens without Crimean residency registration who are excluded from
Russian Federation citizenship
64.
Ukrainian citizens living in Crimea whose passport stamps indicated they were
registered in mainland Ukraine could not become citizens of the Russian Federation. They
assumed the status of a foreigner. As such, they could no longer legally remain in Crimea
for more than 90 days within a period of 180 days from the moment they entered the
peninsula, according to Russian Federation legislation applicable to foreigners.
65.
Non-compliance with immigration regulations imposed by the Russian Federation
can lead to court-ordered deportations. For instance, in 2016, a court in Sevastopol ordered
a Ukrainian citizen who had overstayed to be deported to mainland Ukraine although he
owned property in this city54; another court deported a Ukrainian citizen who had a wife
and children in Crimea.55
66.
Under international humanitarian law, deportation or transfer of protected persons
from occupied territory to the territory of the occupying power or to that of any other
country, occupied or not, is prohibited regardless of the motive. 56
67.
Rules regulating stay were not consistently applied, sometimes favoring
individuals who supported Crimea’s accession to the Russian Federation. For example, the
Supreme Court of Crimea ruled not to deport a Ukrainian citizen who described himself as
“an active participant of the Russian Spring in Sevastopol” and claimed his deportation to
Ukraine would threaten his life and well-being.57 The Court accepted the argument that he
had a family in Crimea and that his deportation would interfere with his private and family
life.
68.
Employment of Ukrainian citizens lacking Crimean residency registration is
prohibited. A quota system under Russian Federation law allows up to 5,000 foreigners to
reside and work in Crimea but this only applies to foreigners with non-Ukrainian passports
who were living in Crimea before March 2014 and held Ukrainian residence permits.58
69.
In 2016, police raids against private businesses were conducted, resulting in the
opening of administrative proceedings against owners of catering institutions 59 and private
entrepreneurs60 who were illegally employing Ukrainian citizens. People illegally employed
risk deportation and their employers face administrative sanctions of up to 800,000 RUB
(nearly USD 13,200) or closure of their business for up to 90 days.
70.
Ukrainian citizens without residency registration in Crimea are excluded from
free health insurance and access to public hospitals. In one case documented by OHCHR, a
Ukrainian woman who had lived in Crimea for 10 years, but was registered in Kharkiv,
died in 2015 after a public hospital in Crimea refused to treat her due to the fact that she did
not have health insurance.61 According to Russian Federation legislation, she was a
foreigner and, as such, she did not have a Russian Federation passport affording the right to
free health insurance and access to public hospitals. The refusal to provide life-saving
medical treatment - including due to origin or status, such as citizenship - constitutes a
grave violation of the right to the highest attainable level of physical and mental health, and

9

a violation of the obligation, under international humanitarian law, to ensure that the health
system in place in an occupied territory continues to function adequately.

3.

Ukrainian citizens who were made to renounce Ukrainian citizenship
71.
Russian Federation law does not require Ukrainian citizens who apply for Russian
Federation citizenship to surrender their Ukrainian passports or relinquish their Ukrainian
citizenship. However, residents of Crimea who were employed in government and
municipal jobs before the referendum were obliged by law to give up their Ukrainian
citizenship no later than 18 April 2014, in addition to obtaining a passport of the Russian
Federation if they wanted to retain their employment.62 A law adopted by the Parliament of
Crimea further required them to possess “a copy of the document confirming denial of
existing citizenship of another State and the surrender of a passport of another State.”63
72.
Before the Russian Federation occupied Crimea, 20,384 civil servants were
employed on the peninsula.64 According to the head of the FMS department for citizenship,
asylum and readmission in Crimea, as of 21 May 2015, 19,000 Crimean residents had
applied to renounce Ukrainian citizenship. 65 While no information is provided about their
identity or profession, it is likely that civil servants constitute the bulk of this group. This is
contrary to the Fourth Geneva Convention, which prohibits an occupying power from
altering the status of public officials in the territories it occupies.66

B.

Administration of justice and fair trial rights
73.
The Treaty on Accession provided for a transition period until 1 January 2015 to
fully apply the legal framework of the Russian Federation in Crimea. 67 In practice, the
gradual substitution of the Ukrainian legal system by that of the Russian Federation implied
that both systems coexisted, regulating different spheres and consequently causing
confusion for legal practitioners as well as legal uncertainty for rights-holders.68
74.
OHCHR recalls that in accordance with international humanitarian law, the penal
laws in place in the occupied territory must remain in force and be applied by courts, with
the exception of norms that constitute a threat to the security of the occupying power, or an
obstacle to the application of relevant international humanitarian law provisions. 69
75.
As documented by OHCHR, the judicial and law enforcement authorities of the
Russian Federation in Crimea frequently violated the presumption of innocence; the right to
information without delay of the nature and cause of charge; the right to defend oneself or
be assisted by a lawyer of one’s own choice; the right to adequate time to prepare defence;
the right to trial without undue delay; the right to appeal or review; the right to a hearing by
an independent and impartial tribunal; and the right not to be compelled to testify against
oneself or confess guilt.
76.
OHCHR documented cases demonstrating that allegations of torture and illtreatment in post-referendum Crimea committed by State agents of the Russian Federation
during pre-trial investigations were often disregarded by courts. For instance, in March
2015, a court rejected the request of a defence lawyer to exclude evidence against his client
reportedly obtained under duress. The judge stated that torture allegations should be
examined together with other elements in order not to compromise the establishment of
facts and responsibility.70
77.
Suspects were charged and some convicted in relation to acts which occurred
before the application of Russian Federation legislation in Crimea, in disregard of the
principle of non-retroactive application of criminal law enshrined in international human
rights and humanitarian law treaties. 71 On 11 September 2017, a court in Crimea sentenced
a deputy chair of the Mejlis, Akhtem Chyigoz, to eight years of imprisonment on the basis
of Russian Federation legislation, after it found the accused guilty of organizing mass
protests, which were held on 26 February 2014 when the legal framework of Ukraine still

10

applied in Crimea. In addition, two individuals received prison sentences in 2015 and 2016
for allegedly injuring ’Berkut’ police officers during the Maidan protests in Kyiv, on 18
February 2014.72 Their convictions were based on Russian Federation legislation introduced
in Crimea after 18 March 2014.
78.
Some judgments were passed in apparent disregard of the right to a hearing by a
competent, independent and impartial tribunal. In 2017, 10 Crimean Tatars arrested for
filming a police raid of the home of another Crimean Tatar man were judged in one day and
sentenced to five days of administrative arrest. No representatives of the prosecution were
present; two men were convicted in the absence of lawyers; and in at least one proceeding,
the judge ignored the public retraction of a witness statement supporting the claim that the
individuals were breaching public order and freedom of movement.73
79.
Instances of intimidation of defence lawyers representing clients opposed to the
presence of the Russian Federation in Crimea have also been reported. On 25 January 2017,
a lawyer from the Russian Federation defending one of the deputy chairmen of the Mejlis
was forcefully brought to the FSB office in Simferopol for interrogation and asked to
disclose details of the case concerning his client. Despite being pressed to cooperate, he
refused, invoking his duty to uphold the attorney-client privilege, and was released after
two and a half hours. On 14 February 2017, an appellate court upheld a first instance
decision to enable the FSB investigator to interrogate him as a witness in a criminal case
against one of his clients.74 OHCHR reiterates that international administration of justice
standards explicitly protect the freedom of exercise of the profession of lawyer.75

C.

Right to life
80.
In February, March and April 2014, four persons were killed and two others died,
as described in this chapter, during incidents related to Crimea’s unrecognized accession to
the Russian Federation. While other deaths, including murders, have occurred in Crimea in
the three and a half years since the occupation began, OHCHR does not have credible
circumstantial evidence that they could be attributed to State agents of the Russian
Federation in Crimea.
81.
In March 2014, a pro-Ukrainian Crimean Tatar activist, Mr. Reshat Ametov, was
abducted, tortured and summarily executed by people believed to be members of the
Crimean self-defence. He disappeared on 3 March after staging a one-man picket in front of
Crimea’s government building in Simferopol. Video footage shows him being led away by
three men in military-style jackets. On 15 March, his body was found in a village of the
Bilohirsk district, bearing signs of torture.76 The Crimean police opened a criminal
investigation. As of December 2014, more than 270 witnesses had been interrogated and
over 50 forensic analyses and 50 examinations had been carried out.77 OHCHR has serious
doubts about the effectiveness of these investigations. The suspects, members of the
Crimean self-defence, who were filmed abducting the victim, were only interrogated as
witnesses and later released. In 2015, the investigation was suspended due to the fact that
the individual suspected by the police to be the perpetrator was allegedly no longer in
Crimea.78 It resumed in 2016 but has since been conducted intermittently.79
82.
Three killings occurred during armed incidents. On 18 March 2014, one
Ukrainian serviceman and one Crimean self-defence volunteer were killed during a
shooting incident in Simferopol.80 OHCHR does not have information about the
investigation conducted in relation to this case. On 6 April 2014, a Ukrainian Army naval
officer was killed by a Russian Federation serviceman in a dormitory in Novofedorivka.81 A
Russian Federation military tribunal in Crimea sentenced the perpetrator to two years of
imprisonment on 13 March 2015. The accused was convicted of homicide committed in
excess of the requirements of justifiable defence. In addition, the victim’s widow sued and
obtained from the Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation 500,000 RUB (about USD
8,000) in compensation for the harm incurred.82

11

83.
The impartiality of investigations carried out by the Crimean police is particularly
questionable in relation to the violence that occurred on 26 February 2014. On that date,
pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian groups clashed in front of the parliament of Crimea,
resulting in the death of two pro-Russian demonstrators.83 The criminal proceedings
identified pro-Ukrainian supporters belonging to the Crimean Tatar community as being the
only suspects although the skirmishes involved representatives of pro-Russian groups as
well.84

D.

Right to physical and mental integrity
84.
The right to physical and mental integrity encompasses freedom from torture and
other inhuman treatment. The Russian Federation and Ukraine have both ratified
international conventions obliging them to prevent and redress torture, cruel and/or
inhuman or degrading treatment.85
85.
Multiple and grave violations of the right to physical and mental integrity have
been committed by state agents of the Russian Federation in Crimea since 2014. The
absence of investigations suggests that their perpetrators have benefited from and continue
to enjoy impunity.
86.
Victims and witnesses have accused the Crimean self-defence of violence against
pro-Ukrainian activists, mainly in 2014. Its members have reportedly been implicated in
attacks, abductions, enforced disappearances, one summary execution, arbitrary detention,
and torture and ill-treatment of individuals opposed to the March 2014 referendum, as well
as of Maidan supporters, members and affiliates of the Mejlis, journalists and Ukrainian
servicemen.86 On 11 June 2014, the Parliament of Crimea legalized the Crimean selfdefence by turning it into a civil group with powers to assist the police. 87
87.
The Russian Federation has indicated that several criminal cases were opened in
which the suspects were members of the Crimean self-defence. These cases are connected
with a robbery, in April 2014, and incidents in which vehicles were taken illegally with the
threat of the use of firearms.88
88.
Two legislative initiatives registered in the Crimean and Russian Federation
Parliaments in August 2014 proposing immunity from prosecution for actions committed
by the self-defence forces have not been pursued.
89.
In view of the multiplicity of testimonies mentioning illicit acts committed by
members of the self-defence with apparent impunity, OHCHR has serious doubts that the
Russian Federation authorities have complied with their obligations to ensure
accountability through effective and impartial investigations. The duty to investigate and
prosecute is made more compelling by the fact that the existence of the self-defence group
has been legalized, and its members have been recognized as agents of the State.89
90.
FSB and the Crimean police have also been accused of violating the right to
physical and mental integrity of persons holding dissenting views, in particular Crimean
Tatars and ethnic Ukrainians. Such violations have occurred prior to and during detention,
in penitentiary institutions and in places where people were illegally kept incommunicado.
91.
In two cases documented by OHCHR in 2016, pro-Ukrainian supporters were
compelled by FSB officers to confess to terrorism-related crimes through torture with
elements of sexual violence. The victims were kept incommunicado, tied, blindfolded,
beaten up, subjected to forced nudity, electrocuted through electric wires placed on their
genitals, and threatened with rape with a soldering iron and wooden stick.90
92.
Forced internment in a psychiatric institution has been used as a form of
harassment against political opponents, which may amount to torture or ill-treatment.
Procedurally, such placements are decided by a judge upon the request of the police or FSB
investigator. A deputy Chairman of the Mejlis, Mr. Ilmi Umerov, underwent an imposed

12

court-ordered ‘psychiatric assessment’ for three weeks 91 after being charged in May 2016
with calls to violate the territorial integrity of the Russian Federation. In November and
December 2016 five Crimean Tatar men suspected of being members of Hizb ut-Tahrir, an
organization banned for terrorism in the Russian Federation, were also placed in a
psychiatric hospital for weeks. During the psychiatric assessment, doctors reportedly asked
them unrelated questions, including on their religious practice and political views.92

E.

Right to liberty and security
93.
The right to liberty and security of person exists to ensure that subjects of a State
can pursue their daily activities without harassment or apprehension of being restrained
without any lawful basis. It includes two key components: freedom from arbitrary arrest or
detention; and protection from enforced disappearances. Arbitrary deprivation of liberty
may amount to a violation of the requirement of common Article 3 of the Geneva
Conventions and Additional Protocol I that all civilians and persons hors de combat should
be treated humanely.

1.

Arbitrary arrests and detentions
94.
The Fourth Geneva Convention specifies that in an occupied territory, a civilian
may only be interned or placed in assigned residence for “imperative reasons of security”
(Article 78). Arbitrary detention is prohibited under customary international humanitarian
law93 and international human rights law protects individuals from arbitrary arrest and
detention by the State, as well as by private individuals or entities empowered or authorized
by the State to exercise powers of arrest or detention.94 According to the United Nations
Human Rights Committee, “arbitrariness is not to be equated with ‘against the law’, but
must be interpreted more broadly to include elements of inappropriateness, injustice, lack
of predictability and due process of law.” 95 Any deprivation of liberty must therefore be
lawful, reasonable and necessary.
95.
OHCHR documented multiple allegations of violations of the right to liberty as a
result of acts attributed to agents of the Russian Federation authorities in Crimea. While
most of them occurred in 2014, fresh claims of unlawful deprivation of liberty are regularly
recorded. Arbitrary arrests and detentions take different forms and appear to serve various
purposes, from instilling fear, to stifling opposition, and inflicting punishment.
96.
In many cases, victims are neither charged nor tried, but detained by the police,
FSB or self-defence groups as a form of extra-judicial punishment or harassment. Detention
under such circumstances would usually last from several hours to several days, exceeding
the legal limits for temporary detention and ignoring procedural requirements, such as the
establishment of a protocol of arrest. Many of the victims were journalists, land or business
owners, and people arrested during so-called ‘prophylactic’ police operations at markets,
mosques, cafés, restaurants or places of entertainment. OHCHR noted a prevalence of
members of the Crimean Tatar community among people apprehended during police raids.
They were typically taken to the police centre to fight extremism (“Center E”),
photographed, fingerprinted and made to provide DNA samples before being released,
usually without any charges being pressed.96
97.
In other cases, people deprived of liberty were charged with offences of
extremism, terrorism, territorial integrity violations, detained and tried. This form of
treatment has been commonly applied against political opponents, such as Crimean Tatar
figures linked to the Mejlis, practising Muslims accused of belonging to banned Islamic
groups, and journalists or individuals posting messages critical of the Russian Federation
authorities or expressing dissent on social media. Prosecutions often seemed to be tainted
by bias and a political agenda.97 The initial arrests were usually carried out by FSB and
followed by searches of victims’ houses and harassment of their families by law

13

enforcement. Victims were charged and subjected to lengthy pre-trial detention despite a
general lack of sufficient evidence.
98.
In the most egregious cases, unlawful detentions were accompanied by physical
or psychological abuse amounting to torture. Many of the victims were people accused of
spying and planning terrorist acts, as well as political and civic activists supporting the
Maidan protests and pro-Ukrainian demonstrations in Crimea or seeking to assist Ukrainian
soldiers stationed in Crimea. On 9 March 2014, two members of a pro-Ukrainian
organization were abducted by the Crimean self-defence, detained in a secret location
without the presence of a lawyer for 11 days - and one of them tortured - before being
released.98 The arrests were made without reasonable suspicion, proper motivation and
court review, qualifying as violations of the right to liberty and security. In addition, the
torture allegations were not investigated, in denial of the right to an effective remedy.

2.

Enforced disappearances
99.
Enforced disappearance, as defined by the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance,99 violates, or threatens to violate, a
range of international humanitarian law norms, most notably the prohibition of arbitrary
deprivation of liberty,100 torture and other cruel or inhuman treatment 101 and murder.102 The
duty to prevent enforced disappearances is further supported by the requirement to record
the details of persons deprived of their liberty.103 The obligations placed on States by the
Convention arguably represent customary international law, which Ukraine (which has
ratified the Convention) and the Russian Federation (which has not done so) are required to
respect. OHCHR notes a precedent in the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human
Rights for holding an occupying power liable for violation of the right to liberty and
security arising from the failure of authorities to investigate the fate and whereabouts of
missing persons in its occupied territory.104
100.
The first recorded case of enforced disappearance in Crimea occurred on 3 March
2014, less than a week after the establishment of a pro-Russian Government in Crimea, on
27 February.105 Since then, dozens of persons have gone missing, mostly in 2014. While the
majority of victims were released by perpetrators within hours or days, the whereabouts of
others are still unknown.
101.
The highest number of enforced disappearances in a single month occurred in
March 2014, when at least 21 persons were abducted in Crimea. The victims included proUkrainian and Maidan activists, journalists, Crimean Tatars and former and active
Ukrainian servicemen. They were held incommunicado and often subjected to physical and
psychological abuse by armed individuals allegedly belonging to the Crimean self-defence
and one Cossack group. Most victims were released after being illegally held from a few
hours to several days, with no contact with their relatives or lawyers. 106
102.
OHCHR documented 10 cases of persons who disappeared and are still missing:
six Crimean Tatars, three ethnic Ukrainians and one Russian-Tatar - all men. Seven went
missing in 2014, two in 2015 and one in 2016.
103.
On 1 October 2014, the Head of Crimea decided to create a ‘contact group’
focusing on the disappearances and other incidents involving Crimean Tatars. The group
convened for the first time on 14 October 2014 in the presence of investigative authorities
and the relatives of five missing Crimean Tatar men but achieved little beyond informationsharing and the decision to transfer the investigations to the central Investigation
Department of the Russian Federation.107 Of the 10 disappearances mentioned, criminal
investigations were still ongoing in only one case as at 12 September 2017.108 They were
suspended in six cases due to the inability to identify suspects,109 and in three cases no
investigative actions have been taken as the disappearances were allegedly not reported. 110

14

104.
In five cases, the possible involvement of State agents was raised by witnesses
who saw the victims being abducted by men dressed in uniform associated with the security
forces or the Crimean self-defence. Circumstances which may suggest political motives in
the other five cases include the profile of the victims who were pro-Ukrainian activists or
had links to the Mejlis.

F.

Right to private and family life
105.
OHCHR estimates that up to 150 police and FSB raids of private houses,
businesses, cafés, bars, restaurants, markets, schools, libraries, mosques and madrassas
(Islamic religious schools) have taken place since the beginning of Crimea’s occupation.
These actions have usually been carried out with the justification to search for weapons,
drugs or literature with extremist content forbidden under Russian Federation law.111
Several interlocutors shared their conviction that the objective pursued by such operations
was to instil fear, particularly in the Crimean Tatar community, in order to pre-empt or
discourage actions or statements questioning the established order since March 2014.
106.
The searches were conducted on the basis of the Russian Federation’s antiextremism law, which is very broad and has been used extensively in Crimea. The law
gives wide discretion to law enforcement agencies to interpret and apply its provisions,
which can be viewed as an infringement of the principles of legality, necessity and
proportionality.112 In her annual report for 2014, the Ombudsperson of the Russian
Federation stated in relation to Crimea that law enforcement officers should adopt “a wellbalanced approach that rules out any arbitrary, excessively broad interpretation of the
notion of ‘extremism’”.113
107.
OHCHR documented raids, which at times took place without search warrants
being presented, involved excessive use of force, and amounted to an arbitrary or unlawful
interference with an individual’s privacy, family and home, in violation of international
human rights law. According to victims, materials considered illegal were planted in homes
and false written testimonies declaring the presence of illegal substances were signed under
duress.114 On 4 and 5 September 2014, at least 10 houses belonging to Crimean Tatars were
searched by police officers and FSB officials in Simferopol, Nizhnegorsk,
Krasnoperekopsk and Bakhchisaray.115 The police found no weapons or drugs but
confiscated religious literature.
108.
There are reports that some house raids were conducted at a time when only
Crimean Tatar women were present and that the absence of female officers among those
carrying out the search greatly disturbed them. 116
109.
As at 12 September 2017, 38 individuals from Crimea and the city of Sevastopol
(35 men and three women) were on a special list of people ‘believed to be involved in
extremism or terrorism’, administered by the Russian Federation Financial Monitoring
Service.117 According to the laws of the Russian Federation on preventing financing of
terrorism applied in Crimea, the bank accounts of individuals on this special list should be
constantly monitored and most of their bank transactions are suspended.
110.
In view of the excessively broad interpretation of the Russian Federation’s antiextremism law applying to Crimea, such limitations may amount to undue interference with
the right to private and family life and to the right to the peaceful enjoyment of one’s
possessions.

G.

Rights of detainees
111.
According to the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine, on 20 March 2014, 1,086
individuals were detained at Crimea’s only pre-trial detention facility in Simferopol, 1353
convicts were serving their sentences in a strict regime colony in Simferopol, 789 convicts

15

were held in a general regime colony in Kerch and 67 in a correction centre in Kerch. All
four institutions have been integrated into the penitentiary system of the Russian
Federation,118 which led to the transfer of hundreds of detainees held in Crimea to
penitentiary institutions in the Russian Federation.

1.

Violations of the rights of prisoners in Crimea
112.
After the Russian Federation took control of Crimea, local courts discontinued all
pending appeal proceedings under Ukrainian law, in violation of fair trial guarantees. 119
Ukrainian penal legislation was repealed and prison sentences were requalified in
accordance with Russian Federation law, sometimes to the detriment of detainees.
113.
Former detainees in Crimea complained to OHCHR about overcrowding, which
can amount to degrading treatment. Built for a maximum capacity of 817 people, the pretrial detention centre in Simferopol had 1,066 detainees in March 2014,120 1,532 in
December 2015,121 and a similar level of overcrowding in 2016.122
114.
Soon after the occupation started, correspondence between detainees in Crimea
and mainland Ukraine was blocked by the administration of the penitentiary service and all
family visits were denied violating the right of prisoners to be allowed to communicate with
family and friends at regular intervals.123
115.
Pressure was exerted on detainees who refused to accept automatic Russian
Federation citizenship as prison officials recorded those who did or did not take Russian
Federation passports.124 A female detainee who rejected Russian Federation citizenship
complained that she was denied family visits and that sunflower oil was regularly poured
over her personal belongings as a harassment technique.125 Other detainees who refused
Russian Federation citizenship were placed in smaller cells or in solitary confinement. 126

2.

Transfer of prisoners to the Russian Federation
116.
A sizeable number of Crimea’s prison population was transferred to the Russian
Federation.127 A key factor explaining this situation is the lack of specialized penitentiary
facilities in Crimea, which has led to the transfer of juveniles in conflict with the law,
people sentenced to life imprisonment, and prisoners suffering from serious physical and
mental illnesses. In addition, Crimea having no prisons for women, 240 female detainees
convicted by Crimean courts were sent to the Russian Federation between 18 March 2014
and 15 June 2016 to serve their sentences. 128
117.
Transfers of pre-trial detainees have also taken place. This is the case of
Ukrainian filmmaker Mr. Oleh Sientsov, who was arrested in Simferopol on 11 May 2014
on suspicion of "plotting terrorist acts”. On 23 May 2014, he was transferred to Moscow’s
Lefortovo prison and later to Rostov-on-Don (Russian Federation) where he was placed in
remand detention. Following his trial and conviction on 25 August 2015, 129 he was
incarcerated in a high security penal colony in the Siberian region of Yakutia.
118.
OHCHR notes that international humanitarian law strictly prohibits forcible
transfers of protected persons, including detainees, from occupied territory to the territory
of the occupying power, regardless of the motives of such transfers. 130 In this regard, the
imposition of Russian Federation citizenship to residents of an occupied territory does not
alter their status as protected persons.
119.
On 17 March 2017, negotiations between the Ombudspersons of Ukraine and the
Russian Federation enabled the return to mainland Ukraine of 12 detainees (11 men and a
woman) sentenced by Ukrainian courts before March 2014, and transferred from Crimea to
various penitentiary institutions in the Russian Federation after that date. OHCHR
interviewed each of them. Some detainees publicly expressing pro-Ukrainian sentiments
reported having been ill-treated and placed in solitary confinement.131 Others complained of

16

the absence of medical treatment. OHCHR documented the death of at least three male
prisoners transferred from Crimea to the penitentiary institution in Tlyustenkhabl, Adygea
region, who were suffering from serious ailments and did not receive necessary medical
care.132 Under international human rights and humanitarian law provisions, detainees must
be provided with the medical attention required by their state of health. 133

H.

Forced enlistment
120.
Since the occupation began, residents of Crimea have been subjected to
conscription in the armed forces of the Russian Federation. Until 31 December 2016,
military service could only take place on the territory of the Crimean peninsula. 134 Since
2017, conscripts can also be sent to serve on the territory of the Russian Federation. On 25
May 2017, 30 conscripts from Sevastopol were sent to the Russian Federation after
reportedly expressing the will to serve there. 135
121.
OHCHR spoke to several Crimean Tatars who left the peninsula to avoid serving
in the Russian Federation army. They stated they could not return to Crimea as they would
be prosecuted for avoiding the draft.136 On 12 April 2017, the Military Commissioner of the
Russian Federation in Crimea announced that a criminal case had been opened against a
resident of Crimea who refused to serve in the Russian Federation army.
122.
OHCHR notes that under international humanitarian law, an occupying power is
prohibited from compelling protected persons to serve in its armed or auxiliary forces or to
exercise pressure or propaganda which aims at securing voluntary enlistment. 137

I.

Freedom of movement
123.
The introduction by the Russian Federation of a State border at the ABL between
mainland Ukraine and Crimea, in violation of General Assembly resolution 68/262, has
adversely affected freedom of movement between mainland Ukraine and the Crimean
peninsula. Other legal restrictions, as per this section, have been imposed both by the
Governments of the Russian Federation and Ukraine.138
124.
International human rights law guarantees freedom of movement to anyone
lawfully within the borders of a State and the right to leave and enter their own country. 139
It also recognizes that a sovereign Government has the right to restrict freedom of
movement provided such a measure is necessary, reasonable and proportionate.

1.

Restrictions imposed by the Russian Federation authorities
125.
On 25 April 2014, the Russian Federation authorities established its ‘border’ at
the northern entrance to Crimea. Ukrainian activists, supporters and members of the Mejlis,
in particular, have frequently faced infringements on their movement, including intrusive
and lengthy interrogations whenever entering or leaving Crimea through the ABL.
126.
In addition, citizens of Ukraine have been deported from Crimea for violating
Russian Federation immigration rules, which, pursuant to resolution 68/262, should not
apply to the territory of Crimea. For instance, the Crimea-born chairman of an NGO from
Evpatoriia providing free legal aid was convicted in January 2017 of “illegal stay” by a
Crimean court which ordered his deportation. 140 In 2012, his Crimean passport registration
had been cancelled on procedural grounds, which disqualified him from obtaining Russian
Federation citizenship in March 2014. The court which ordered his deportation found him
to be a foreigner who violated immigration rules by staying in Crimea beyond the
authorized 90-day period. Following the ruling, the man was transferred from Crimea to the
region of Krasnodar (Russian Federation), detained for 27 days, and subsequently deported
to mainland Ukraine where he currently lives as an IDP. He is banned from entering
Crimea - where his wife and son live - until 19 December 2021, which violates his freedom

17

of movement and his right to family life.141 In addition, his forced transfer and deportation
contravene international humanitarian law rules applying to protected persons in situations
of occupation.142
127.
OHCHR has information that 20 to 25 other Ukrainian citizens were deported
from Crimea to mainland Ukraine in 2016, and has reasons to believe that the total number
since the beginning of the occupation of Crimea may be significantly higher.143
128.
Unlawful limitations to freedom of movement were also imposed against political
opponents and individuals criticizing the human rights situation on the peninsula who were
prohibited entry into the Russian Federation, consequently banning their access to Crimea.
On 22 April 2014, a Russian Federation officer at the ABL handed the former leader of the
Mejlis, Mr. Mustafa Dzhemilev, an unsigned document informing him of being banned
from entering the territory of the Russian Federation for five years. On 5 July 2014, the
current head of the Mejlis, Mr. Refat Chubarov, was issued an entry ban for allegedly
inciting inter-ethnic hatred.144 Other people subjected to similar prohibitions include in
2014 the director of Crimean Tatar news agency QHA, and in 2016 a Ukrainian journalist
and a defence lawyer.145

2.

Restrictions imposed by Ukraine
129.
Between March and December 2014, Ukraine suspended air, train and bus
connections to the peninsula. Older persons, persons with disabilities and children were the
most affected by the absence of public transportation. Some said they had no choice but to
walk across the ABL for more than two kilometres, sometimes in adverse weather
conditions.146 The only means of transport remaining are private cars and taxis that operate
between Ukraine’s mainland and Crimea.
130.
According to Ukrainian legislation, Ukrainian citizens have the right to free and
unimpeded access to Crimea.147 However, crossing into the peninsula is permitted – for
Ukrainian citizens and foreigners alike – only through three crossing points located in the
region of Kherson, namely Kalanchak, Chaplynka or Chonhar. Foreign citizens violating
rules on access to Crimea are prohibited from entering Ukraine for a period of three
years.148
131.
National legal requirements related to the travel of children have constricted
freedom of movement. Children below 16 years of age, if accompanied by only one parent,
must have notarized written consent of the other parent.149 This has created problems for
Crimean residents, as documents issued by the Russian Federation authorities in Crimea are
not recognized in Ukraine.
132.
Specific requirements also apply to foreigners and stateless persons who may
only enter and leave Crimea with a special permission issued by Ukrainian authorities
following a lengthy procedure.
133.
Another freedom of movement restriction applied to limitations in the
transportation of consumer goods and personal belongings to and from Crimea introduced
by Government decree No. 1035 of 16 December 2015. A court decision issued in June
2017 found the restrictions to be unlawful, although OHCHR observed through monitoring
of the ABL it conducted in August 2017 that posters informing travellers of transportation
limitations under decree No. 1035 were still present at the Chonhar crossing point.150
134.
A so-called civil blockade of Crimea was initiated in September 2015 by the
Crimean Tatar leadership in mainland Ukraine to prevent trade with the Russian Federation
occupying Crimea and draw the attention of the international community to human rights
violations on the peninsula. The enforcement of the blockade was accompanied by
incidents, including physical attacks by blockade participants of people travelling from
Crimea, as well as confiscation of goods and personal items, violating human rights and

18

impacting freedom of movement across the ABL. 151 On 17 January 2015, the organizers of
the ‘civil blockade’ of Crimea announced they had stopped enforcing their embargo. 152
135.
OHCHR noticed security risks for travellers related to the presence of
insufficiently marked minefields on both sides of the road leading to the Kalanchak and
Chaplynka crossing points. Representatives of Ukraine’s State Border Guard Service said
they had no maps with mine locations. Although small triangular mine signs are visible, the
risk of accidentally walking into an ill-marked minefield remains.153

J.

Freedom of thought, conscience and religion
136.
It is a norm of customary international humanitarian law that the convictions and
religious practices of civilians and persons hors de combat must be respected.154 Article 58
of the Fourth Geneva Convention provides that the occupying power must permit ministers
of religion to give spiritual assistance to members of their religious communities, and
Article 15 of the First Protocol to this Convention states that an occupying power should
respect and protect civilian religious personnel. Furthermore, the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms provide that everyone has the right to freedom of thought,
conscience and religion, and that the right to manifest one’s religion and beliefs may only
be subject to limitations, which are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public
safety, order, health, morals or the rights and freedoms of others.155
137.
After the start of the occupation, freedom of religion or belief in Crimea has been
jeopardized by a series of incidents targeting representatives of minority confessions and
religious facilities belonging to them. Limitations on religious freedom have also resulted
from the imposition of legal re-registration requirements, legislation increasing restrictions
on the activities of religious groups in the name of fighting extremism, and judicial
decisions.
138.
The Parliament of the Russian Federation adopted legal amendments - commonly
referred to as the ’Yarovaya package’ – which came into force on 20 July 2016 as an antiterrorism measure allowing the authorities to monitor extremist groups. The amendments
practically ban missionary groups and house prayers by making proselytizing, preaching,
praying, or disseminating religious materials outside of “specially designated places”, like
officially recognized religious institutions, a punishable crime.156
139.
In the first year after adoption of the ’Yarovaya package’ eight persons from
Crimea - including four Jehovah’s Witnesses, three Protestants and one Muslim – were
fined 5,000 RUB each (USD 85) for conducting a missionary activity. 157 In addition, eight
religious communities - two Jehovah’s Witness, one Catholic, one Lutheran, one
Pentecostal and one Hare Krishna - were fined in amounts ranging from 30,000 RUB (USD
525) to 50,000 RUB (USD 875) for violating the prohibition for a religious organization to
conduct activities ”without indicating its official full name”.158
140.
The gravest and most frequent incidents involving representatives of minority
confessions were reported in 2014. For instance, on 1 June, men in Russian Cossack
uniforms broke into the local Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate (UOCKP) in the village of Perevalne, shouting and terrorizing churchgoers. The car of the priest
was damaged. The police were called but did not investigate the incident. 159 On 21 July, a
house in the village of Mramorne belonging to the UOC-KP was burnt to the ground.160 A
pastor of the Protestant Church from Simferopol and his family left the peninsula after
reportedly being told by FSB officers that he could ‘disappear’.161 Greek-Catholic priests
faced threats and persecution, resulting in four out of six of them leaving Crimea. A Polish
citizen and the senior Roman Catholic priest in the Simferopol parish had to leave on 24
October, due to the non-renewal of Ukrainian residence permits. Most of the 23 Turkish
162
Imams and teachers on the peninsula have left for the same reason.
On 26 April,
unknown persons threw Molotov cocktails at a mosque in the village of Skalyste, setting it

19

on fire. On 25 July, a Muslim cemetery in Otuz was damaged. Several mosques and
madrassas (Islamic schools) belonging to the Spiritual Administration of the Muslims of
Crimea (DUMK) were raided in 2014 by FSB officers searching for banned extremist
materials and members of radical groups.163 The raids have continued in the following years
but their frequency diminished after the DUMK leadership started cooperating with the
Russian Federation authorities in Crimea in 2015.
141.
Pursuant to Russian Federation legislation imposed in Crimea, public
organizations in Crimea, including religious communities, were subjected to the obligation
to re-register to obtain legal status. The religious communities which applied for
registration had to submit the statutes of the organization, two records of community
meetings, a list of all the community members, and information on the “basis of the
religious belief”. Only Russian Federation citizens are allowed to register a religious
community.
142.
Without registration, religious communities can congregate but cannot enter into
contracts to rent State-owned property, open bank accounts, employ people or invite
foreigners. The deadline for re-registration was extended twice and expired on 1 January
2016. The process has been lengthy and lacked transparency.164
143.
Before the occupation of Crimea, there were 2,083 religious organizations in
Crimea and 137 in Sevastopol, both with and without legal entity status.165 As of 4
September 2017, 722 religious communities were registered in Crimea and 96 in
Sevastopol. They included the two largest religious organizations of the Christian Orthodox
and Muslim communities, as well as various Protestant, Jewish, Roman-Catholic and
Greek-Catholic communities, among other religious groups.
144.
One of the religious communities registered in Crimea, the Jehovah’s Witnesses,
was declared illegal in an April 2017 decision of the Supreme Court of the Russian
Federation, which found that the group had violated the country’s anti-extremism law. On 1
June 2017, all 22 congregations in Crimea were de-registered, affecting the right to freedom
of religion of an estimated 8,000 believers. On 9 June 2017, a Jehovah Witness was told at
a military conscription centre in Crimea that he could not invoke his right to an alternative
civilian service under Russian Federation legislation unless he renounced his faith and
changed his religion.166 On 27 June, the head of the Jehovah Witnesses community in
Dzhankoy was summoned to court, charged with unlawful missionary activity, and died
later that day of a heart attack.167
145.
The Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the Kyiv Patriarchate (UOC-KP) chose not to
re-register under Russian Federation law and thus has no legal recognition. Since 2014, five
UOC-KP churches have been either seized by paramilitary groups or closed due to nonrenewal of their property leases.168 The activities of another UOC-KP church, located in
Simferopol, were disrupted on 31 August 2017, when court bailiffs stormed the building of
the church. The action was undertaken pursuant to a judgment, upheld by the Supreme
Court of the Russian Federation in February 2017, ordering to vacate premises in the
building used by a daughter company of the UOC-KP as office space and a shop. As of 12
September 2017, worship services were still held but fewer parishioners attended them. 169

K.

Freedom of peaceful assembly
146.
Freedom of peaceful assembly guarantees the right of individuals to gather
peacefully in order to express an aim or issue in public. It is protected by various
international legal instruments and closely connected with other fundamental rights such as
freedom of speech, thought and association. Limitations are permitted in accordance with
international law, including administrative regulations, as long as they are proportionate
and not used to oppress the nature of free assembly.

20

147.
The possibility to peacefully gather or hold a rally in Crimea has been
significantly reduced since March 2014. Restrictive legal measures placed additional
obstacles to the exercise of the right to peaceful assembly. According to legislation adopted
by the Parliament of Crimea in August 2014, the organizers of public assemblies must be
Russian Federation citizens and must officially request permission to hold an assembly no
more than 15 days and no fewer than 10 days prior to the planned event. In addition, a
resolution of the Government of Crimea of 4 July 2016 reduced from 665 to 366 the
number of locations throughout the ‘Republic of Crimea’ where public events could be
organized, without explaining the motives of this decision.170
148.
Lengthy blanket prohibitions on holding public assemblies have been issued,
including an indefinite one decided by the Simferopol city authorities. In March 2016, a
ban on all public events on the territory of the city was decreed, with the exception of those
organized by the republican and local authorities. 171 This measure was not taken in response
to a sudden deterioration of public order and clearly infringed on the freedom to hold
peaceful public assemblies.
149.
Public events initiated by groups or individuals not affiliated with the Russian
Federation authorities in Crimea or which consider that Crimea remains a constituent part
of Ukraine have systematically been prohibited and prevented. On 23 September 2014, the
Prosecutor of Crimea issued a statement that “all actions aimed at the non-recognition of
Crimea as a part of the Russian Federation will be prosecuted.” 172 Consequently, any
assembly demanding the return of Crimea to Ukraine or expressing loyalty to Ukraine has
been effectively outlawed.
150.
Requests to hold peaceful public assemblies have often been rejected on
procedural technicalities, which appeared to be neither necessary to justify a ban nor
proportionate and responding to a general public interest. For example, the Simferopol city
authorities refused to grant permission for an assembly planned by the Crimean Tatar NGO
Kardashlyk for 23 August 2014 near the memorial complex for the victims of the Crimean
Tatar deportation. The motive provided was that the extremely high temperatures could
negatively affect the health of participants. Yet, other outdoor events planned on the same
day went ahead.173
151.
In some cases, refusals to authorize public events were based on unsubstantiated
allegations that “extremist” or “separatist” messages would purportedly be disseminated
during their conduct. 174
152.
Spontaneous gatherings have been met with sanctions. Crimean Tatars taking part
in unauthorized motorcades to commemorate the Crimean Tatar deportation were regularly
arrested, interrogated for hours, and fined.175 An elderly Crimean Tatar man holding a oneperson picket in support of prosecuted Crimean Tatars was arrested in front of the building
of the Supreme Court of Crimea on 8 August 2017. He was charged with carrying out an
unauthorized public gathering and resisting police orders and sentenced by court to an
administrative fine of 10,000 RUB (USD 175) and 10 days of detention.
153.
The European Court of Human Rights has found that restrictions imposed on
assemblies to prevent minor disorder are often disproportionate measures, and that
incidents of violence are better dealt with by way of subsequent prosecution or disciplinary
actions.176 In relation to blanket legal provisions which ban assemblies at specific times or
in particular locations, the Special Rapporteur on the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association stated that they require greater justification than restrictions on
individual assemblies.177

L.

Freedom of opinion and expression and the media
154.
Human rights law guarantees the right to hold opinions without interference.
Undue restrictions on the right to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all

21

kinds gravely undermine freedom of expression, which is protected under Article 19 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 10 of the European
Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
155.
The right to express one’s view or opinion has been significantly curtailed in
Crimea.178 In March 2014, analogue broadcasts of Ukrainian television channels were shut
off and the vacated frequencies started broadcasting Russian TV channels. Journalists were
attacked or ill-treated without any investigation being conducted into these incidents. 179 In
June 2014, the only Ukrainian language newspaper, Krymska svitlytsia, was banned from
distribution and had to vacate its rented premises.
156.
Official ‘warnings’ have often preceded the closing down of a media outlet. They
applied to views, articles or programmes whose content were deemed ‘extremist’. The
editor of the weekly Mejlis newspaper Avdet received several written and oral warnings
from FSB officers that the newspaper materials allegedly contained extremist content, such
as use of the terms ‘annexation’, and ‘temporary occupation’ of Crimea.180 The Crimean
Tatar ATR television channel was warned by Roskomnadzor, the Russian Federation media
regulatory body, against disseminating false rumours about repression on ethnic and
religious grounds and promoting extremism. 181
157.
ATR and Avdet were among the Crimean Tatar media outlets which were denied
re-registration according to Russian Federation legislation and had to cease operations on
the peninsula. When the deadline for re-registration expired on 1 April 2015,
Roskomnadzor reported that 232 media were authorized to work, a small fraction of the
approximately 3,000 media outlets previously registered under Ukrainian regulations.182 In
addition, other popular Crimean Tatar media outlets, such as Lale television channel,
Meydan and Lider radio stations, QHA news agency and 15minut Internet site, were denied
licenses to work. Procedural violations were cited as the main reasons for rejection.183
158.
The minority language media that continued operating or registered as a new
media entity, have no political content or support the official position on the status of
Crimea. Crimean television has information and education programmes in the native
languages of national minorities, including Armenian, Bulgarian, Crimean Tatar, German,
Greek, and Ukrainian. Its programmes for the Crimean Tatar community include the
Crimean Tatar news Haberler, Netije, and Ekindi Subet; the talk-show Dilde, fikirde, işte
birlik; the educational programme Eglenip-Ogrenem; the cultural and religious programme
Selyam Aleykum; and the informational and cultural programme Tanysh-Belish.184
159.
According to the United Nations Human Rights Committee “the penalization of a
media outlet [including online media], publishers or journalists solely for being critical of
the government or the political social system espoused by the government can never be
considered to be a necessary restriction of the freedom of expression.” 185 Yet, provisions of
the Russian Federation penal code have regularly been used by the authorities in Crimea to
criminalize free speech and dissenting opinions of journalists and non-journalists alike.
160.
On 7 July 2017, a court in Crimea convicted a Crimean Tatar man from
Sevastopol to one year and three months of prison for “publicly inciting hatred or enmity”.
During an eight months period in 2016, he had posted statements on Facebook mentioning
the “oppression” of the Crimean Tatars, referring to Crimea being “occupied” and
“annexed”, and quoting a Crimean Tatar leader who had organized the food and trade
blockade of Crimea in September 2015.186
161.
People have also been charged under the accusation of advocating separatism. In
2017, the trials of a journalist from Crimea and a deputy chairman of the Mejlis, started.
Both men were charged with “public calls to violate the territorial integrity of the Russian
Federation” in connection with an article and a televised interview, respectively.187 If found
guilty, they face prison sentences of up to five years.

22

M.

Freedom of association
162.
Following the occupation of Crimea, most human right groups ceased to exist or
relocated elsewhere in Ukraine. Some did so in protest against the new situation, while
others felt compelled to do so, on account of personal threats and physical violence faced
by their members.
163.
For instance, the director of the Yalta-based NGO Almenda left Crimea on 16
March 2014, one day after she was warned by members of the Crimean self-defence that
her safety was “no longer guaranteed.”188 Several members of the NGO Ukrainian House
were tortured and forcibly disappeared in connection with their role in organizing Maidan
events in Crimea and their subsequent opposition to Russian Federation presence.
164.
Civic groups or non-governmental institutions which stayed but did not accept the
policies of the new authorities faced systematic obstruction of their activities, intimidation
and sometimes prosecution. In September 2014, the Crimean police organized searches,
seized property, and evicted the charitable organization Crimea Foundation from its
premises in Simferopol. The eviction also affected the central office of the Mejlis and the
Mejlis weekly newspaper Avdet.189
165.
As other legal entities, NGOs were required to re-register under Russian
Federation law, which involved a number of constraints. Application documents included
inter alia a new version of the NGO statute and a formal decision by the NGO executive
body to align its founding documents with legislative requirements. If the NGO was not
registered at the local address of a founder who was a Crimean resident, applicants were
required to provide a letter from the owners of the intended rental premises of the NGO
guaranteeing that they did not object to such a registration.190
166.
The re-registration of NGOs was further stymied by implementation of the
Russian Federation’s law on ‘foreign agents’ and ‘undesirable organizations’ in Crimea,
both of which have had a chilling effect on civic groups.191 Some decided not to seek
registration while others decided to forgo foreign funding rather than endure frequent
inspections and stigmatization.
167.
The restrictive conditions placed by the legislation of the Russian Federation on
activities of civil society organizations have been reflected in the number of NGOs which
currently operate on the peninsula. As of 4 September 2017, 1,852 NGOs were registered in
Crimea and the city of Sevastopol192 compared to 4,090 in mid-March 2014.193
168.
While the Russian Federation authorities in Crimea attempted to silence the
Mejlis, they selectively allowed the establishment of organizations representing the
Crimean Tatars, including Kyryym, Kyryym Birligi, the Crimean Tatar ’Inkishaf’ Society
and the Association of Crimean Tatar Businessmen.
169.
Four national-cultural associations representing Ukrainians have been registered
in Crimea: the Simferopol-based Renaissance in Unity, Ukrainians of Simferopol,
Ukrainians of Yevpatoriia and Ukrainians of Yalta. The members of the unregistered
Simferopol-based Ukrainian Cultural Centre, which has been under constant surveillance
since 2014, were regularly called by the police or FSB for ‘informal talks’. Their public
activities, including paying tribute to Ukrainian literary, political or historic figures, were
often disrupted or prohibited. In May 2017, the Centre closed due to the absence of funds to
pay for the rent of its premises, and on 29 August 2017, its director left the peninsula for
mainland Ukraine following anonymous text message threats and information that the FSB
would arrest him.194

23

VII.

Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
A.

Property rights
170.
Following Crimea’s occupation, the Russian Federation authorities proceeded
with a large-scale nationalization of public and sometimes private property. Expropriation
was done in disregard of ownership rights and without compensation. Proper regulation of
housing, land and property issues are also central to the Crimean Tatars who, almost three
decades after returning from deportation, have not obtained security of tenure guarantees.

1.

Property nationalization
171.
Since the March 2014 referendum, many of the most economically valuable
assets in Crimea – from energy companies to mobile operators – have been expropriated,
often by force.
172.
On 24 August 2014, the Crimean self-defence took over the Zaliv shipbuilding
company, preventing the management from entering the premises. A new administration
from Zelenodolsk (Tatarstan) was subsequently imposed on the firm.195 On 27 August
2014, members of the Crimean self-defence entered the headquarters of Ukrainian gas
company Krymgas and seized all documents and stamps. The entrances were blocked and
the employees were advised either to quit or to sign applications for transfer of their jobs to
a newly created gas company.196
173.
Regulatory acts have been adopted to provide legitimacy to the nationalization
process.197 However, frequent amendments, which increased the number and nature of
property to be nationalized, undermined legal certainty and guarantees against arbitrariness.
For example, Resolution No. 2085-6/14, which originally focused on nationalization of
property without ownership or belonging to the State of Ukraine, was amended to include
111 individual property assets listed in a separate Annex called “List of property considered
as the property of the Republic of Crimea”. During 2014-2016, hotels, private apartments,
non-residential premises, markets, gas stations, land plots and movable property, were
added to the Annex by new resolutions, which contained no criteria for the nationalization
and, in most cases, no information on the owners of nationalized property.
174.
On 27 February 2015 Crimea’s Parliament adopted Resolution No. 505-1/15
declaring an end to the nationalization process and prohibiting the inclusion of new
property into the Annex starting from 1 March 2015. However, this provision was
subsequently amended on 16 September 2015, allowing inclusion of land plots and some
new information in the List of nationalized property for “clarification purposes.” As of 12
September 2017, the Annex with the list of nationalized property had been amended 56
times and now contains 4,618 “nationalized” public and private real estate assets. 198
175.
Similar processes have taken place in the city of Sevastopol.199 With the purpose
of “restoring social fairness and maintaining public order”, the city authorities nationalized
13 companies and 30 real estate assets between February 2015 and July 2016.200
176.
OHCHR recalls that, according to international humanitarian law, private
property, as well as the property of municipalities and institutions dedicated to religion,
charity and education, the arts and science may not be confiscated, 201 and that immovable
public property must be administered according to the rule of usufruct. 202

2.

Housing, land and property of formerly deported people
177.
The question of housing, land and property in Crimea is sensitive, particularly for
Crimean Tatars who returned from exile starting from the late 1980s. The unmanaged

24

return process and the perceived injustices in land allocation led to Crimean Tatars settling
on unoccupied or public land.203
178.
While successive Governments of Ukraine took steps to facilitate repatriation to
Crimea and resolve some of the issues facing formerly deported persons, many problems
remained. In a decree issued by former President Viktor Yanukovych in 2010, the need to
solve “the burning problem of resettlement” of formerly deported persons was
acknowledged.204
179.
After taking control of the peninsula, the Russian Federation authorities in
Crimea pledged to legalize the unauthorized appropriation of land or allocate alternative
land plots to Crimean Tatars.205 In 2015, they adopted a law enabling Russian Federation
citizens of Crimea who illegally built property on a seized plot of land to acquire this
land.206 There is no information on how this law has been implemented. Crimean Tatars
have expressed concern about the citizenship requirement prescribed by the law, which
automatically excludes from the process of legalization formerly deported persons who
were not residents of Crimea on 18 March 2014 or have returned from deportation after that
date. Other obstacles, including resistance from title owners of land plots and competing
interests among Crimean Tatar groups representing returnees have also adversely affected
the process of acquisition.
180.
Additional concerns rose after several cities in Crimea allowed the demolition of
buildings constructed without necessary permits. The most recent decision applies to
Simferopol207 and envisages that buildings constructed on land plots located in areas of
restricted use, such as public areas and areas near utility facilities, will be torn down. The
demolition of such buildings, to be ordered by local administrations and special “demolition
commissions”, could result in evictions disproportionately affecting Crimean Tatars.
181.
Forced evictions constitute a violation of a broad range of human rights, including
the right to adequate housing and freedom from arbitrary interference with home and
privacy.208 OHCHR recalls the importance of preventing forced evictions by inter alia
repealing legislation which allows for such practice and taking measures to ensure the right
to security of tenure for all residents. 209

Right to maintain one’s identity, culture and tradition

B.

182.
The Russian Federation authorities in Crimea have denied various manifestations
of Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar culture and identity by groups perceived as hostile to the
Russian Federation and to Crimea’s status as a part of it. Pressure, intimidation and
prohibitive administrative or court decisions have been applied. Such actions violate Article
15 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which
guarantees the right of everyone to take part in cultural life, and Article 27 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which provides that in States where
ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities should
not be denied the right, in community with other members of their group, to enjoy their
own culture, to profess and practice their own religion, or to use their own language.

1.

Limitations of the right of Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars to express their culture
and identity
183.
Following Crimea’s occupation, the Ukrainian and Crimean Tatar communities
have been constricted in their ability to display Ukrainian state and cultural symbols and
publicly celebrate important dates for their communities. Festivities and assemblies
organized by minority groups have only been allowed if those groups supported the
position of the Russian Federation on the status of Crimea.

25

184.
On 18 February 2015, the Bakhchysarai authorities prohibited the local Mejlis
from carrying out a rally in commemoration of the anniversary of the death of Noman
Çelebicihan, an important figure in Crimean Tatar history. On 11 March 2015, a court in
Simferopol ordered 40 hours of corrective labour for three pro-Ukrainian activists and 20
hours for a fourth after they unfurled a Ukrainian flag bearing the inscription “Crimea is
Ukraine” during a rally to commemorate the anniversary of the national poet of Ukraine,
Taras Shevchenko, two days before.210 In June 2015, the city of Simferopol rejected an
application by the Mejlis’ to hold celebrations of the Crimean Tatar Flag Day.
185.
Institutions promoting Ukrainian culture and traditions have been shut down. The
Museum of Ukrainian Vyshyvanka - a traditional Ukrainian embroidery - was closed in
February 2015, and books by contemporary Ukrainian authors have been removed from the
Franko Library located in Simferopol.211
186.
The recognition under the constitution of the “Republic of Crimea” of Ukrainian
and Crimean Tatar as official languages on a par with the Russian language has been
largely declaratory. A draft law on the use of Crimea’s official languages was registered in
the Parliament of Crimea on 4 April 2017, but has yet to be discussed.212

2.

The ban of the Mejlis
187.
In 2016, the Russian Federation authorities in Crimea outlawed the Mejlis, a
development which many in the Crimean Tatar community perceived as an attack against
their culture and identity. While it is not supported by all Crimean Tatars, the Mejlis is
viewed by many as a self-governing body and traditional organ of an indigenous people. Its
members, forming an executive body, were elected by the Kurultai, the Crimean Tatars’
assembly.
188.
On 26 April 2016, the Supreme Court of Crimea declared the Mejlis to be an
extremist organization and prohibited it from conducting any activities. The ruling was
followed by an instruction, in May 2016, by the Vice Prime Minister of Crimea addressed
to the heads of local governments in Crimea to report to the Prosecutor of Crimea any
violations committed by Mejlis members or activists.213
189.
On 29 September 2016, the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation upheld the
ban, and supported the Prosecution which argued that the Crimean Tatar leadership of the
Mejlis had repeatedly violated Russian Federation legislation and caused prejudice to
residents of Crimea by organizing a trade blockade in 2015. The Mejlis was also accused of
orchestrating a cut-off in energy supplies to the peninsula - with adverse humanitarian
consequences for the population - caused by the sabotage of electricity pylons in mainland
Ukraine. OHCHR notes that the ruling confirms the significant restrictions already imposed
by the Russian Federation authorities in Crimea on this institution since 2014. It appears to
be based on prejudicial evidence and disregards the legitimate character of the Mejlis as an
elected organ representing the Crimean Tatar community.
190.
In addition to prohibiting any public activity by or on behalf of the Mejlis, the
court decision implies that the estimated 2,500 members of the national and local Mejlis
bodies can incur criminal liability and face up to eight years in prison for belonging to an
organization recognized as extremist. While no criminal sanctions have been imposed so
far, some members of the Mejlis have been subjected to administrative sanctions. On 28
September 2016, eight of them were fined by courts in amounts ranging from 750 RUB
(USD 12) to 1,000 RUB (USD 15) for holding an “illegal meeting” of this organization.214
191.
On 19 April 2017, the International Court of Justice delivered an Order on
provisional measures in proceedings brought by Ukraine against the Russian Federation,
concluding that the Russian Federation must “Refrain from maintaining or imposing
limitations on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to conserve its representative
institutions, including the Mejlis“.215

26

192.
On 25 August 2017, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
issued its Concluding Observations on the twenty-third and twenty-fourth periodic reports
of the Russian Federation.216 In these Concluding Observations, the Committee stated that
it was “particularly concerned” about the ban on the Mejlis and the “strict limitations on the
operation of Crimean Tatar representative institutions, such as the outlawing of the Mejlis
and the closure of several media outlets.”
193.
As of 12 September 2017, the Mejlis remains a banned organization pursuant to
the decisions of the Supreme Courts of Crimea and the Russian Federation.

C.

Right to education in native language
194.
International human rights instruments ratified by both Ukraine and the Russian
Federation guarantee the right to education.217 States are obliged to prioritize the
introduction of compulsory, free primary education and must “take steps” towards the
realization of secondary, higher and fundamental education for all those within its
jurisdiction.218 Article 2 of the First Protocol to the European Convention on the Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms provides that states should respect the right of
parents to ensure education and teaching in conformity with their own religious and
philosophical convictions. Article 50 of the Fourth Geneva Convention provides that the
occupying power should, with the cooperation of the national and local authorities,
facilitate the proper working of all institutions devoted to the care and education of
children.
195.
Shortly after the March 2014 referendum, schools and universities in Crimea
started functioning in accordance with the curriculum and educational standards of the
Russian Federation. The education and academic qualifications obtained in Ukrainian
educational establishments were recognized while a large-scale in-training programme for
over 20,000 Crimean teachers started in June 2014.219
196.
Overall, the introduction of Russian Federation education standards has limited
the right of ethnic Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars to education in their native language.
While under Russian Federation law minority language instruction is available from grades
1 to 9, in senior classes of secondary schools (grades 10 and 11) all subjects must be taught
in Russian. Furthermore, there is no clear procedure regulating the education in a mother
tongue and no legally defined numeric threshold for opening schools or classes.
197.
The number of students undergoing instruction in Ukrainian language has
dropped dramatically. In the 2013-2014 academic year, 12,694 students were educated in
the Ukrainian language. Following the occupation of Crimea, this number fell to 2,154 in
2014-2015, 949 in 2015-2016, and 371 in 2016-2017. In April 2015, the long-time director
of the only Ukrainian-language gymnasium in Simferopol left Crimea, allegedly due to
threats and harassment. Between 2013 and 2017, the number of Ukrainian schools
decreased from seven to one, and the number of classes from 875 to 28.220
198.
OHCHR considers that the main reasons for this decrease include a dominant
Russian cultural environment and the departure of thousands of pro-Ukrainian Crimean
residents to mainland Ukraine. Pressure from some teaching staff and school
administrations to discontinue teaching in Ukrainian language has also been reported.
199.
At the university level, the Department of Ukrainian Philology in the Vernadskiy
Taurida National University was closed down in September 2014 and the majority of its
teaching staff laid off.221 The departments of Ukrainian philology, culture of the Ukrainian
language and theory and history of the Ukrainian language have been merged into one
department. By the end of 2014, Ukrainian as a language of instruction had been removed
from university-level education in Crimea.

27

200.
On 19 April 2017, the International Court of Justice delivered an Order on
provisional measures in proceedings brought by Ukraine against the Russian Federation,
concluding unanimously that the Russian Federation must “Ensure the availability of
education in the Ukrainian language”.222
201.
The number of students receiving their instruction in Crimean Tatar language has
remained stable, largely due to a high level of cultural awareness among the Crimean
Tatars. In the 2013-2014 academic year, when Ukraine’s curriculum was last applied in
Crimea, 5,551 Crimean Tatars were educated in their native language. In 2014-2015, the
figure was 5,146, in 2015-2016 it was 5,334, and in 2016-2017, 5,330 children were
educated in Crimean Tatar.223 Fifteen Crimean Tatar national schools were functioning in
2017, as in 2013.224

D.

Right to health
202.
The availability of health care treatment in Crimea has been affected by the
departure of numerous doctors and medical staff from medical State institutions. Drug users
have additionally suffered from a disruption in treatment caused by the implementation of
Russian Federation legislation.
203.
In General Comment No. 14, the United Nations Committee on Economic Social
and Cultural Rights reminded all States parties to the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights of the “minimum essential levels of each of the rights enunciated
in the Covenant, including essential primary health care.” Those minimum essential levels
include “the right of access to health facilities, goods and services on a non-discriminatory
basis, especially for vulnerable or marginalized groups,” including the provision of
essential drugs. Similarly, international humanitarian law obliges an occupying power to
ensure food, hygiene, public health and medical supplies for the inhabitants of occupied
territories.

1.

Medical staff deficit in public hospitals
204.
Crimea is confronted with an acute lack of medical personnel, an enduring
phenomenon which pre-dates the occupation by the Russian Federation but has been
aggravated after March 2014 due to the departure of many doctors to the private sector.
205.
Since 2014, many doctors in Crimea have left public health care institutions for
private clinics on the peninsula, which provide higher salaries and better working
conditions. A similar situation prevails in the city of Sevastopol, where salaries in private
clinics in 2017 were two and a half times higher (40,000 RUB i.e. USD 660) than in public
hospitals (16,000 RUB i.e. USD 265).225 Physicians in public hospitals also criticized what
they viewed as excessive bureaucratic paperwork and a system of remuneration deriving
from new Russian Federation regulations, with the payment of a full doctor’s salary
depending on the result of multiple inspections and internal audits.226
206.
In November 2016, 7,195 doctors and 17,283 other medical personnel were
employed in public medical centres in Crimea, with only 62.3 per cent of physicians’
positions occupied.
207.
The Minister of Health of Crimea publicly acknowledged a lack of physicians,
pediatricians, general practitioners, emergency staff and laboratory technicians. For three
months in 2016, the main public hospital in Crimea’s second most populated district,
Kerch, had no doctor in its neurosurgical department. The situation is most worrying in the
districts of Rozdolne, Nyzhnohirskyi, Krasnoperekopsk, Pervomaysky and Armyansk, and
in the countryside, where only 40 per cent of the medical staff positions are filled.227

28

208.
The shortage of medical personnel has had an impact on the quality of free public
health care services and created long waits, delaying treatment for the most economicallydisadvantaged patients and jeopardizing their right to health.228

2.

Impaired treatment of drug users
209.
Retrogressive measures introduced in Crimea since the application of Russian
Federation legislation have undermined the right to health for those suffering from drug
dependence.
210.
An estimated 21,100 injecting drug-users lived in Crimea in 2013. Substitution
Maintenance Therapy (SMT) for Crimean patients was terminated after the peninsula was
incorporated in the Russian Federation. The latter bans the medical use of methadone and
buprenorphine in the treatment of drug dependence and does not have maintenance therapy
programmes.229 Medicines given to patients in rehabilitation centres include
benzodiazepines, barbiturates, neuroleptics and anti-psychotic drugs, which are not
considered a reasonable alternative to the banned treatments among independent health care
experts.
211.
As a result, 803 registered heroin addicts previously receiving Opioid Substitution
Therapy (OST) in Crimea no longer had access to this treatment.230 This has had major
detrimental effects, including changes in treatment, breaches of patient confidentiality, and
increased mandatory drug screening.231
212.
Without methadone, users often relapse into taking heroin and risk an overdose.
The United Nations Special Envoy for HIV/AIDS evoked the possibility that by January
2015, up to 100 former OST recipients had died in Crimea due to complications related to
overdose or suicide,232 although in June 2014, Crimea’s health authorities were denying any
deaths.233
213.
Comprehensive harm reduction strategies, which include OST, are essential to
prevent and treat HIV, hepatitis and tuberculosis among people who inject drugs. The ban
on OST opiates crippled Crimea’s HIV prevention programmes, which included inter alia
needle exchanges covering 14,000 people and OST for intravenous drug-users.
214.
According to the Chief Doctor of Crimea’s Centre for the prevention and control
of AIDS, 1,417 newly diagnosed cases of HIV infection were recorded in Crimea for the
first nine months of 2016, including 25 per cent resulting from drug injection.234

E.

Access to water and other essential services
215.
The right to an adequate standard of living including in particular access to food,
water and other essential items, is included in several international human rights treaties.235
In addition, international humanitarian law prohibits the attack, destruction, removal, or
rendering useless objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population, such as
foodstuffs, water installations and supplies and irrigation works.236
216.
Until 2014, Crimea was 82 per cent dependent on water supplies via the North
Crimean Canal that links the Dnepr river in mainland Ukraine and the peninsula. The
eastern Crimean regions stretching from Sudak to Kerch have virtually no surface sources
of water. On 13 May 2014, the Ukrainian State Water Resources Agency informed that
Ukraine had shut off water supplies to Crimea via the North-Crimean Canal. While this
situation had no negative implications on drinking water,237 agricultural lands were
affected, and practically all rice plantations on the peninsula perished.238 According to the
Federal target programme on the socioeconomic development of Crimea, until 2020
“Crimea’s dependence on supply of water via the North Crimean Canal can be eventually
reduced or eliminated by searching for underground water sources, including manmade
ones”.239

29

217.
Crimea was also dependent on supplies from mainland Ukraine for up to 85 per
cent of the electricity it consumed. Access to energy is a component of the right to adequate
housing, which is derived from the right to an adequate standard of living.240 On 21-22
November 2015, energy deliveries were disrupted after perpetrators believed to be
supporting the blockade of Crimea damaged four transmission towers in the region of
Kherson, which supplied electricity to Crimea. Although one of the power lines was later
repaired, energy supplies from mainland Ukraine have since not resumed due to the nonrenewal of the contract between Ukraine’s energy company and the Russian Federation
authorities in Crimea, which expired on 1 January 2016.241
218.
Following the power outage, for about three weeks, the interruption of energy
deliveries to Crimea caused widespread disruptions, affecting food conservation, lighting,
heating, public transportation and economic activity. Although the Russian Federation
authorities in Crimea redirected available energy resources to the most critical social
infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools, the impact of this situation has been acute,
particularly for people with limited mobility and low income.
219.
Pursuant to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights,
States parties must ensure the satisfaction of minimum essential levels of rights under the
Covenant in all circumstances.242 Under international humanitarian law, the Russian
Federation as the occupying power is obliged to ensure to the fullest extent of the means
available to it sufficient hygiene and public health standards, as well as the provision of
food and medical care to the population. At the same time, this does not exonerate Ukraine
from its obligations under the International Covenant not to interfere with the enjoyment of
the rights it enshrines, and from respecting the requirement under international
humanitarian law to ensure that the basic needs of the population continue to be met under
conditions of occupation.243

VIII.

Conclusions and Recommendations
220.
The human rights situation in Crimea has significantly deteriorated since the
beginning of its occupation by the Russian Federation. The imposition of a new citizenship
and legal framework and the resulting administration of justice have significantly limited
the enjoyment of human rights for the residents of Crimea. The Russian Federation has
extended its laws to Crimea in violation of international humanitarian law. In many cases,
they have been applied arbitrarily.
221.
Russian Federation authorities in Crimea have supported groups and individuals
loyal to the Russian Federation, including among national and religious minorities, while
preventing any criticism or dissent and outlawing organized opposition, such as the Mejlis.
The space for civil society to operate, criticize or advocate has considerably shrunk. Media
outlets have been shut down, disproportionately affecting the Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian
communities, their right to information and to maintain their culture and identity.
222.
Grave human rights violations affecting the right to life, liberty and security have
not been effectively investigated. The judiciary has failed to uphold the rule of law and
exercise proper administration of justice. There is an urgent need for accountability for
human rights violations and abuses and providing the victims with redress.
223.
Moreover, the freedom of movement between mainland Ukraine and Crimea has
been restricted and the ABL has acquired many attributes of a State border.
224.
Since the attempted alteration of the status of Crimea by the Russian Federation, a
development which was denounced by General Assembly resolution 68/262 and later
qualified as occupation in General Assembly resolution 71/205, the forcible integration of
the peninsula into the political, legal, socio-economic, educational, informational, cultural
and security spheres of the Russian Federation has been actively pursued, deepening the
divide between this territory of Ukraine and the rest of the country.

30

225.
In July 2016, Crimea was administratively attached to the Southern Federal
District of the Russian Federation, further strengthening implementation of policies from
the central level and coordination with neighboring regions of the Russian Federation. The
peninsula has been integrated into the energy grid of the Russian Federation, which is also
building a rail-and-road bridge through the Kerch strait, creating a land corridor to Crimea.
This intensified integration is further compounded by population movements - from the
Russian Federation to Crimea and from Crimea to mainland Ukraine - which tend to favour
and strengthen pro-Russia sentiments on the peninsula.
226.

In order to improve the human rights situation in Crimea, OHCHR recommends:

To the Government of the Russian Federation to:
a) Uphold human rights in Crimea for all and respect obligations that apply to an
occupying power pursuant to international humanitarian law provisions;
b) Ensure proper and unimpeded access of international human rights monitoring
missions and human rights non-governmental organizations to Crimea, pursuant
to General Assembly resolution 71/205;
c) Apply Ukrainian laws in Crimea, pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 68/262
and 71/205;
d) Ensure accountability for human rights violations and abuses through effective
investigations of allegations of ill-treatment, torture, abductions, disappearances
and killings involving members of the security forces and the Crimean selfdefence; bring perpetrators to justice and provide redress for victims;
e) Comply with the international humanitarian law prohibition to compel residents of
the occupied territory of Crimea to serve in the armed forces of the Russian
Federation and to deport or transfer parts of the civilian population of the Russian
Federation into Crimea; return to Crimea all protected persons transferred to the
territory of the Russian Federation;
f) Ensure independent and impartial administration of justice, including due process
and fair trial rights, and that persons deprived of liberty benefit from all legal
guarantees, including equal treatment before the law, the right not to be
arbitrarily detained, the presumption of innocence and the prohibition from selfincrimination;
g) End the practice of retroactive application of penal laws to acts committed before
the occupation of Crimea, and refrain from using law enforcement bodies and the
justice system to pressure and intimidate opponents;
h) Uphold the right of defence counsel to perform their professional functions without
intimidation, harassment or improper interference;
i) End the practice of extracting confessions of guilt from persons in detention through
threats, torture, or ill-treatment, and refrain from practices such as forcible
psychiatric hospitalization, which may amount to ill-treatment;
j) Ensure adequate medical assistance to all individuals detained in penitentiary
institutions irrespective of their citizenship or any other grounds;
k) Enable unimpeded freedom of movement to and from Crimea, and end
deportations of Crimean residents pursuant to Russian Federation immigration
rules;
l) Ensure that the rights to freedom of expression, peaceful assembly, association,
thought, conscience and religion can be exercised by any individual and group in
Crimea, without discrimination on any grounds, including race, nationality,
political views or ethnicity;

31

m) Stop applying legislation on extremism, terrorism and separatism to criminalize
free speech and peaceful conduct, and release all persons arrested and charged for
expressing dissenting views, including regarding the status of Crimea;
n) Allow the development of independent and pluralistic media outlets, including
those representing minority communities, and refrain from placing legal and
administrative obstacles on their registration or operation;
o) Put an end to police actions, including house searches, summons, detentions, taking
of DNA samples, targeting disproportionately members of the Crimean Tatar
community;
p) Lift any limitations on the ability of the Crimean Tatar community to conserve its
representative institutions, including the Mejlis;
q) Ensure the availability of education in the Ukrainian language, and enable all
ethnic communities in Crimea, including the Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians, to
maintain and develop their culture, traditions and identity, and to commemorate
important events;
r) Ensure access of all Crimean residents, including those without Russian Federation
passports, to employment, health treatment, property and public services, without
discrimination;
s) End the ban on the use of Substitution Maintenance Therapy (SMT) for patients
suffering from drug dependence;
t) Respect the right to property and the prohibition to confiscate private property;
ensure security of tenure for the Crimean Tatars by putting in place a mechanism
facilitating recognition of their property rights.

To the Government of Ukraine to:
a) Use all legal and diplomatic means available to promote and guarantee the
enjoyment of the human rights of residents of Crimea;
b) Investigate, within practical limits, human rights violations and abuses committed
in Crimea as well as those perpetrated in mainland Ukraine in relation to the
‘civil blockade’ of Crimea;
c)

Remove all non-necessary restrictions to freedom of movement to and from
Crimea, and ensure that the perimeter of the mined area near the Kalanchak and
Chaplynka crossing points in the Kherson region is visible and well protected;

d) Simplify access to civil documents, education and other public services to
residents of Crimea and IDPs;
e)

Support dialogue between the Ombudspersons of Ukraine and the Russian
Federation to facilitate the voluntary transfer of Ukrainian prisoners held in
Crimea to penitentiary institutions in mainland Ukraine;

f)

Refrain from actions that would raise obstacles to the enjoyment by residents of
Crimea of their human rights.

To the international community:
a) Insist on full cooperation of the Russian Federation with international and
regional monitoring mechanisms, including by granting unrestricted access to
their representatives to Crimea;

32

b) Remind the Russian Federation and Ukraine to strictly abide by international
human rights law and international humanitarian law in ensuring the protection
of the population of Crimea;
c)

Raise cases of human rights violations and abuses in discussions with the Russian
Federation authorities at bilateral and multilateral forums.

33

IX.

End notes

1

Hereafter referred to as ‘Crimea’.
All future references to the term “occupation” are to be interpreted in line with UN
General Assembly resolution 71/205 referring to the “temporary occupation” of Crimea.
3
The resolution 71/205 was adopted by the UN General Assembly on 19 of December
2016.
4
The people’s militia was registered on 29 July 2014. It is composed of former policemen
and army officers, Afghan war veterans and biker groups, tasked to ‘maintain order and
combat fascism’ on the peninsula; see Народное Ополчение Республика Крым, “Устав
Общественной Организации”, 9 сентября 2014, available at: http://narodnoeopolchenie.ru/ustav-obshhestvennoy-organizatsii/.
5
Speaking to journalists, the President of the Russian Federation, Vladimir Putin, stated:
“Behind the backs of the Crimean self-defense units, there were our soldiers. They acted in
a very polite, but decisive and professional manner. There was no other way to help the
people of Crimea to express their free will”. Video conference, Ria Novosti, 17 April 2014.
6
Interview given to the TV channel “Rossiya” as part of a documentary “Crimea. The way
home”, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c8nMhCMphYU.
7
The referendum question provided two alternatives: “1. Are you in favour of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea reuniting with Russia as a constituent part of the Russian
Federation?” or “2. Are you in favour of restoring the Constitution of the Republic of
Crimea of 1992 and of Crimea’s status as part of Ukraine?”
8
See the statement of the Spokesperson of the UN Secretary-General of 17 March 2014
http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=47366#.WcU48nRx3IU.
9
Article 45 of the Convention (IV) respecting the Laws and Customs of War on Land and
its annex: Regulations concerning the Laws and Customs of War on Land. The Hague, 18
October 1907 and Article 64, Geneva Convention IV.
10
The Mejlis is a self-governing institution of the Crimean Tatar people holding executive
powers. Its members are chosen from among the members of an elected assembly, the
Kurultai.
11
Articles 49 and 76, Geneva Convention IV.
12
See “Human Rights Assessment Mission in Ukraine. Human Rights and Minority Rights
Situation”, OSCE report of the High Commissioner for National Minorities and the Office
for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights, The Hague/ Warsaw (12 May 2014), pp.
49-76.
13
Interview given to the TV channel “Rossiya” as part of a documentary “Crimea. The way
home”, available at: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c8nMhCMphYU.
14
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/25/ukraine-sevastopol-installs-prorussian-mayor.
15
According to the Constitution of the ‘Republic of Crimea’, adopted on 11 April 2014,
the Head of Crimea («Глава Республики Крым») who is the highest-ranking official of
Crimea may also act as the Prime Minister of Crimea. Starting from 14 April 2014, Sergey
Aksenov has been acting as the Head and the Prime Minister of Crimea. See:
http://glava.rk.gov.ru/rus/officially.htm
16
The referendum question provided two alternatives: “1. Are you in favour of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea reuniting with Russia as a constituent part of the Russian
Federation?” or “2. Are you in favour of restoring the Constitution of the Republic of
Crimea of 1992 and of Crimea’s status as part of Ukraine?”
17
http://www.crimea.gov.ru/act/11689.
2

i

18

The Opinion was prepared following a request of the Secretary-General of the Council of
Europe of 7 March 2014.
19
See Paragraph 28 of Opinion no. 762 / 2014 on “Whether the decision taken by the
Supreme Council of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in Ukraine to organize a
referendum on becoming a constituent territory of the Russian Federation or restoring
Crimea’s 1992 constitution is compatible with constitutional principles” (Venice, 21-22
March 2014).
20
See supra endnote 8.
21
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15April 2014, paragraph 82
22
According to the Crimean the election commission, 1,274 096 persons (83.1 per cent)
cast their ballots, of whom 1,233,002 (96.77 per cent) voted to join the Russian Federation,
31,997 (2.51 per cent) voted for Crimea to be part of Ukraine, and 9,097 votes (0.72 per
cent) were invalid; see http://archive.is/bvjR6. In Sevastopol, 274,101 persons (89.5 per
cent) cast their ballots, of whom 262,041 (95.6 per cent) voted to join the Russian
Federation, 9,250 (3.37 per cent) voted for Crimea to be part of Ukraine, and 2,810 votes
were invalid (1.03 per cent); see http://archive.is/zbExZ.
23
On 14 March 2014, the Constitutional Court of Ukraine ruled that the decision to hold a
referendum was unconstitutional, and on 15 March the Parliament of Ukraine terminated
the powers of the Parliament of Crimea.
24
The law “On Securing the Rights and Freedoms of Citizens and the Legal Regime in the
Temporarily Occupied Territory of Ukraine” entered into force on 22 November 2014.
25
The resolution was adopted by 101 countries, 11 voted against, 58 abstained and 24 were
absent.
26
The resolution was adopted by 70 countries, 26 voted against, 77 abstained and 21 were
absent.
27
Agreement between the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Government of Ukraine concerning the deployment of a short-term UN Human Rights
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine, done at Geneva on 31 July 2014.
28
The objectives of the visit were to discuss allegations of human rights violations,
protection concerns and the establishment of a sub-office of the HRMMU in Simferopol.
See OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 March to 2 April 2014,
paragraphs 80 to 93.
29
Gender-sensitive investigation methods, including regarding interviewing, security
arrangements, witness protection and safe handling of information were used by OHCHR.
See OHCHR manual on gender integration in monitoring available at
https://intranet.ohchr.org/Offices/Geneva/TESPRDD/RuleofLawEqualityandNonDiscriminationBranch/WomensHumanRightsAndGenderSection/Documents/Chapter1520pp.pdf.
30
Article 42 of the 1907 Hague Regulations states: “Territory is considered occupied when
it is actually placed under the authority of the hostile army. The occupation extends only to
the territory where such authority has been established and can be exercised.”
31
On 15 September 2015, Article 1 of the law of Ukraine “On Securing the Rights and
Freedoms of Citizens and the Legal Regime in the Temporarily Occupied Territory of
Ukraine” was amended to establish the beginning of the occupation of Crimea on 20
February 2014.
32
The Government of Ukraine exercised its right to derogate from its obligations under the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in relation to the rights to liberty and
security (Article 9); fair trial (Article 14); effective remedy (Article 2(3)); respect for
private and family life (Article 17); and freedom of movement (Article 12) as well as
obligations enshrined in Article 5 (liberty and security), Article 6 (fair trial) Article 8

ii

(respect for private and family life) and Article 13 (effective remedy) of the European
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
33
Human
Rights
Committee,
Concluding
Observations
on
Moldova
(CCPR/C/MDA/CO/2(2009), paragraph 5).
34
Ilascu and Others v. Moldova and Russia, 48787/99, European Court of Human Rights, 8
July 2004, paragraph 331.
35
Article 43, 1907 Hague Regulations.
36
Henckaerts, Doswald-Beck, Customary International Humanitarian Law, Volume I. Rule
149, hereinafter, Customary IHL Rules; See also Article 3, Hague Convention (IV) and
Article 91, Additional Protocol I.
37
See Report of the International Criminal Court on Preliminary Examination Activities
(2016), paragraphs 155 to 158. Pursuant to two article 12(3) declarations lodged by the
Government of Ukraine on 17 April 2014 and 8 September 2015, the Court may exercise
jurisdiction over Rome Statute crimes committed on the territory of Ukraine since 21
November 2013.
38
http://2001.ukrcensus.gov.ua/eng/results/general/nationality/.
39
http://www.statdata.ru/naselenie-krima-i-sevastopolya.
40
http://www.dsns.gov.ua/ua/Ostanni-novini/61047.html.
41
http://www.internal-displacement.org/europe-the-caucasus-and-centralasia/ukraine/figures-analysis.
42
http://www.gks.ru/free_doc/new_site/population/demo/perepis_krim/obsh_itog_kfo.docx
43
http://www.statdata.ru/naselenie-krima-i-sevastopolya.
44
See Article 4 of the Russian Federation law “On the Accession of the Republic of Crimea
into the Russian Federation and the Creation of New Federal Subjects – the Republic of
Crimea and the City of Federal Significance Sevastopol” (21 March 2014).
45
See Annual Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Russian
Federation for 2014, Crimea chapter.
46
Article 45, 1907 Hague Regulations.
47
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 2 April to 6 May 2014,
paragraph 127.
48
http://rian.com.ua/CIS_news/20140422/345528247.html.
49
Article 20, Federal Law No. 62-FZ "On Citizenship of the Russian Federation" (31 May
2002).
50
http://helsinki.org.ua/advices/poluchenye-vyda-na-zhytelstvo-dlya-hrazhdanpozhelavshyh-sohranyt-ukraynskoe-hrazhdanstvo-y-prozhyvayuschyh-postoyanno-naterrytoryy-kryima/.
51
Article 3 of the Russian Federation Law “On circulation of agricultural land” (24 July
2002).
52
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2016,
paragraph 197.
53
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 November 2016 to 15
February 2017, paragraphs 139 to 141.
54
Judgment of the Balaklava district court of the Republic of Crimea, 22 November 2016,
No. 5-207/2016, http://sudact.ru/regular/doc/s56ZvgkNvSgw/
55
Judgment of the Supreme court of the Republic of Crimea, 15 November 2016, No. 122050/2016, http://sudact.ru/regular/doc/hbZ5VPzDk7l0/.
56
In addition, the occupying power may undertake total or partial evacuation of a given
area if the security of the population or imperative military reasons so demand. See Article
49, Geneva Convention IV.
57
Judgment of the Supreme court of the Republic of Crimea, 17 November 2016, No. 12401/2016, http://sudact.ru/regular/doc/Q9mwes1Qfjb/.

iii

58

See “Human Rights in Retreat. Abuses in Crimea”, Human Rights Watch, 17 November
2014, available at: https://www.hrw.org/report/2014/11/17/rights-retreat/abuses-crimea.
59
Judgment of the Supreme court of the Republic of Crimea, 2 November 2016, No. 121696/2016, http://sudact.ru/regular/doc/55PTDREeCUZT/.
60
Judgment of the Sudak city court of the Republic of Crimea, 25 October 2016, No. 5131/2016, http://sudact.ru/regular/doc/MdwdkOOIxGdO/.
61
OHCHR report on the situation of human rights in Ukraine, 16 November 2015 to 15
February 2016, paragraph 195.
62
Article 4 of the Federal Constitutional Law “On the Accession of the Republic of Crimea
into the Russian Federation and the Creation of New Federal Subjects – the Republic of
Crimea and the City of Federal Significance Sevastopol” (21 March 2014).
63
Article 11 of the Law of the Republic of Crimea “On State Civil Service of the Republic
of Crimea” (29 May 2014).
64
This number includes 3,581 persons employed in the city of Sevastopol and 16,803 in the
Autonomous
Republic
of
Crimea. http://www.ukrstat.gov.ua/druk/publicat/kat_u/2014/bl/03/bl_ds_13.zip.
65
http://ru.krymr.com/content/news/27024784.html.
66
Article 54, Geneva Convention IV.
67
Article 6 of the Russian Federation law “On the Accession of the Republic of Crimea into
the Russian Federation and the Creation of New Federal Subjects – the Republic of Crimea
and the City of Federal Significance Sevastopol” (21 March 2014).
68
The Annual Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Russian
Federation for 2014 mentions in relation to Crimea that the “objective difficulties of the
transition period throughout 2014” have given rise to “a number of legal and law
enforcement grey areas” which have encouraged corruption schemes, Moscow, 2015, p. 96.
69
Article 64, Geneva Convention IV.
70
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2015,
paragraph 159
71
See Articles 64, 65, 67, and 70, Geneva Convention IV and Article 15, International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
72
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2015,
paragraphs 158-159 and HRMMU report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May
to 15 August 2016, paragraph 157.
73
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2017,
paragraph 144.
74
Ibid. paragraph 145.
75
UN Basic Principles on the Role of Lawyers adopted by the Eighth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba, 27
August to 7 September 1990, Principles 16 and 22.
76
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 March to 2 April 2014,
paragraph 86.
77
See List of Issues in Relation to the Seventh Periodic Report of the Russian Federation,
Human Rights Committee, 18 December 2014, CCPR/C/RUS/Q/7/Add.1, paragraph 173.
78
http://khpg.org/en/index.php?id=1457018864.
79
HRMMU interview, 13 August 2017.
80
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/ukraine/10716412/Ukrainesunlikeliest-funeral-the-only-two-foes-to-die-in-Russias-Crimea-takeover-are-mournedtogether.html.
81
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/ukraine-naval-officer-shot-dead-byrussian-solider-in-crimea-9243306.html.
82
https://ru.krymr.com/a/27740314.html.

iv

83

https://www.kyivpost.com/article/content/euromaidan/two-die-in-rallies-outside-crimeanparliament-says-ex-head-of-mejlis-337708.html.
84
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 November 2015 to 15
February 2016, paragraph 187.
85
See Article 2, Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment; Article 7, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
and Article 3, European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms.
86
See OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 June 2014, paragraphs
299-303 and 309 and OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 18 August
to 16 September 2014, paragraph 165.
87
See Report by Nils Muiznieks, Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of
Europe, following his Mission in Kyiv, Moscow and Ukraine, from 7 to 12 September
2014, paragraph 17.
88
See List of Issues in Relation to the Seventh Periodic Report of the Russian Federation,
Human Rights Committee, 18 December 2014, CCPR/C/RUS/Q/7/Add.1, paragraph 174.
89
Principles on the Effective Prevention and Investigation of Extra-Legal, Arbitrary and
Summary Executions, Principle 2.
90
HRMMU interviews, 7 September 2016 and 11 December 2016.
91
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 August to 15 November
2016, paragraph 158.
92
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 November 2016 to 15
February 2017, paragraph 133.
93
Rule 99, Customary International Humanitarian law.
94 Article 9, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
UN Human Rights Committee (HRC), General comment no. 35, Article 9 (Liberty and
security of person), 16 December 2014, CCPR/C/GC/35.
95
Communication No. 458/1991, A. W. Mukong v. Cameroon (Views adopted on 21 July
1994), in UN doc. GAOR, A/49/40 (vol. II), p. 181, paragraph 9.8.
96
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2016,
paragraphs 183 to 185.
97
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 November 2015 to 15
February 2016, paragraph 202.
98
HRMMU interview, 20 October 2014.
99
Article 2, Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance.
100
Rule 99, Customary International Humanitarian Law.
101
Rule 90, Ibid.
102
Rule 89, Ibid.
103
Rule 123, Ibid.
104
See Cyprus v. Turkey, 25781/94, Judgment, European Court of Human Rights, 10 May
2001, http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-59454.
105
Reshat Ametov, a pro-Ukrainian activist, was abducted in Simferopol and found dead
two weeks later.
106
The Ukrainian NGO CrimeaSOS estimates that between March 2014 and March 2017,
agents of the Russian Federation were directly or indirectly involved in at least 36 cases of
enforced disappearances. See Enforced Disappearance in Crimea Annexed by Russian
Federation 2014-2016, CrimeaSOS, p. 2.
107
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 November 2014,
paragraphs 213-215.
108
Information provided by the Prosecutor’s office of the Republic of Crimea to
CrimeaSOS on 29 November 2016.

v

109

Ibid.
Ibid.
111
The Federal List of Extremist Materials was introduced by Federal Law No. 114-FZ “On
Combating Extremist Activities” (25 July 2002).
112
See Opinion No. 660/2011on the Federal Law on Combating Extremist Activity of
Russian Federation, The European Commission For Democracy Through Law (Venice
Commission), 1 June 2012.
113
Annual Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Russian Federation
for 2014, Moscow, 2015, p. 99
114
See “The Situation of the Crimean Tatars since the Annexation of Crimea by the Russian
Federation”, Report prepared by an Unofficial Turkish Delegation in Crimea on 27-30
April 2015 (5 June 2015), pp. 9-10.
115
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 18 August to 16 September
2014, paragraphs 155-156.
116
See “The Situation of the Crimean Tatars since the Annexation of Crimea by the
Russian Federation”, ibid. p. 9.
117
http://fedsfm.ru/documents/terrorists-catalog-portal-act
118
http://www.krim.fsin.su/news/detail.php?ELEMENT_ID=129921.
119
Article 14(5), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
120
Statistics of the State Penitentiary Service of Ukraine as of 20 March 2014,
http://www.kvs.gov.ua/peniten/control/main/uk/publish/article/735176.
121
Annual Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Russian Federation
for 2015, Moscow, p. 72
122
Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights in the Republic of Crimea, 2016, p.
63, http://ombudsman.rk.gov.ru/file/doklad_2016.pdf.
123
Rule 58, United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (The
Nelson Mandela Rules).
124
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2017,
paragraph 150.
125
HRMMU interview, 21 March 2017.
126
Ibid.
127
One Ukrainian NGO claimed on 31 May 2016 that 2,200 prisoners had been transferred
from Crimea to the Russian Federation, https://hromadskeradio.org/programs/hromadskahvylya/2200-krymskyh-uvyaznenyh-bulo-peremishcheno-na-terytoriyu-rosiyiadvokat#.V01n6plSZF0.twitter.
128
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2016,
paragraph 181.
129
The trial started on 21 July 2015, and on 25 August 2015, a military tribunal sentenced
him to 20 years of imprisonment.
130
See Articles 49 and 76, Geneva Convention IV.
131
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2017,
paragraph 151.
132
Ibid. paragraph 152.
133
See Article 76, Geneva Convention IV; Article 10, International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights; Article 3, European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, and Kudla v. Poland, 30210/96, European Court of Human Rights, 26 October
2000, paragraph 94.
134
Article 7, Treaty of Accession between the Republic of Crimea and the Russian
Federation (18 March 2014).
135
This figure was announced by the military commissioner of Sevastopol, Alexei
Astakhov, on 25 May 2017.
110

vi

136

HRMMU interviews, 20 November 2015 and 13 October 2016.
Article 51, Geneva Convention IV.
138
See OSCE Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine thematic report, “Freedom of
movement across the administrative boundary line with Crimea” (21 June 2015), available
at: http://www.osce.org/ukraine-smm/165691.
139
See Article 12, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; and Articles 2 and
3, Protocol 4 to the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
140
HRMMU interview, 5 May 2017.
141
See Article 23, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Article 10,
Convention on the Right of the Child; Article 8, European Convention on Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms.
142
Article 49, Geneva Convention IV.
143
HRMMU interview, 26 May 2017.
144
The decision on the undesirability of stay of Mr. Dzhemilev and Mr. Chubarov in the
Russian Federation was taken pursuant to Article 27 of the Federal Law “On the Procedure
of Exit from the Russian Federation and Entry to the Russian Federation. See Annual
Report of the High Commissioner for Human Rights of the Russian Federation for 2014, p.
101.
145
HRMMU interview, 17 October 2016.
146
HRMMU interviews, 19 February 2015, 22 September 2015 and 3 February 2016.
147
See Article 10, Law of Ukraine “On Guaranteeing the rights and freedoms of citizens
and on the legal regime on the temporarily occupied territory of Ukraine”.
148
On 23 November 2016, 14 citizens of Uzbekistan and one Azeri citizen travelling from
Crimea to mainland Ukraine were stopped by Ukrainian border guards on the ABL and
issued with three-year entry bans to Ukraine for having accessed Crimea through the
Russian Federation, in violation of Ukrainian legislation.
149
See Government Regulation No. 367 of 4 June 2015.
150
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2017,
paragraph 148.
151
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 August to 15 November
2015, paragraphs 144 to 146.
152
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 November 2015 to 15
February 2016, paragraph 198.
153
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2016,
paragraph 175.
154
Rule 104, Customary International Humanitarian Law.
155
See Article 18(3), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and Article 9(2),
European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
156
Maximum fines amount to the equivalent of $780 for individuals or $15,000 for
organizations.
157
See Article 5.26, part 4 of the Code of Administrative Offenses of the Russian
Federation (“Carrying out missionary activity in violation of the requirements of the law”).
158
See Article 5.26, part 3, ibid.
159
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 7 May to 7 June 2014,
paragraph 315.
160
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 July to 16 August 2014,
paragraph 163.
161
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 1 to 30 November 2014,
paragraph 84.
162
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine 15 December 2014, paragraph
84.
137

vii

163

On 24 June 2014, the FSB raided a madrassa in the village of Kolchugino, in the
Simferopol district. On 13 August 2014, three madrassas in Simferopol were searched. On
22 September 2014, a seven-hour search was carried out at the Derekoi Mosque in Yalta.
164
See report of the Independent Expert on minority issues, Rita Izsák, concerning the
protection and promotion of the rights of religious minorities, A/68/268, paragraph 61: “It
is essential to ensure that all procedures for registration are accessible, inclusive, nondiscriminatory and not unduly burdensome. Registration procedures designed to limit
beneficiaries due to political or social intolerance run afoul of human rights standards”.
See also report of the Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief, Heiner
Bielefeldt, A/HRC/22/51, paragraph 42: “failure to register, or re-register periodically,
could lead to legal vulnerability that also exposes the religious minorities to political,
economic and social insecurity”.
165
The term “religious organizations” includes parishes, congregations, theological schools,
monasteries, and other constituent parts of a church or religious group.
166
http://khpg.org/en/index.php?id=1497831415.
167
https://uawire.org/news/jehovah-s-witness-follower-in-the-crimea-dies-after- his-trial.
168
The churches in Perevalne (Simferopol district) and Sevastopol were seized while those
in Krasnoperekopsk, Kerch and Saki were closed.
169
https://ru.krymr.com/a/news/28721834.html.
170
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2016,
paragraphs 165 to 167.
171
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 November 2015 to 15
February 2016, paragraphs 199-200.
172
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 17 September to 31 October
2014, paragraph 212.
173
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 18 August to 16 September
2014, paragraph 159.
174
According to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Article 21) and
the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Article 11), state
authorities have a responsibility to respect and ensure freedom of peaceful assembly,
including by protecting assemblies from attacks or disruption by third parties. Any
restrictions of this right must be proportionate to achieve a legitimate aim that is
demonstrably necessary in a democratic society.
175
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2015,
paragraph 175.
176
European Court of Human Rights, Stankov and the United Macedonian Organization
Ilinden v. Bulgaria (2001), paragraph 94.
177
See A/HRC/31/66 paragraph 30, and A/HRC/23/39, paragraph 63.
178
See Amnesty International “One Year On. Violations of the right to freedom, expression
and association in Crimea”, March 2015, pp 9-14.
179
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 7 May to 7 June 2014,
paragraphs 298 to 301 and 303.
180
Ibid. paragraph 302.
181
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 17 September to 31 October
2014, paragraph 230.
182
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, submission to UNESCO, 14 April
2015, available at: http://russianunesco.ru/eng/article/2070).
183
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2015,
paragraphs 165-166.

viii

184

See Fourth Report submitted by the Russian Federation pursuant to Article 25,
paragraph 2 of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
(Received on 20 December 2016), p. 28.
185
Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 34, Article 19: Freedoms of opinion
and expression, UN Doc. CCPR/C/GC/34 (12 September 2011), paragraph 42.
186
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August
2017,paragraph 139.
187
See Amnesty International Public statement, “Crimea: Rapidly Deteriorating Human
Rights Situation in the International Blind Spot”, 17 March 2017, p. 5.
188
HRMMU interview, 29 June 2014.
189
See “The situation of national minorities in Crimea following its annexation”, European
Parliament, Policy Department, Directorate General for External Policies, 2016, p.19,
available at:
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2016/578003/EXPO_STU(2016)578
003_EN.pdf.
190
Russian Federal Law “On Amending the Federal Law ‘Enacting chapter 1 of the Civil
Code of the Russian Federation’ and Article 1202(3) of the Civil Code of the Russian
Federation” (5 May 2014), available at: http://base.garant.ru/70648870/.
191
Russian Federal Law “On Amending some legal acts of the Russian Federation” (23
May 2015) and Russian Federal Law “On Introducing Amendments to Certain Legislative
Acts of the Russian Federation Regarding the Regulation of Activities of Non-Commercial
Organizations Performing the Function of Foreign Agents” (20 July 2012).
192
This number includes “autonomous non-commercial organizations”, “national-cultural
autonomies” and “non-government organizations”. See http://unro.minjust.ru/NKOs.aspx.
193
http://rgo.informjust.ua/.
194
HRMMU interview, 3-4 September 2017
195
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 18 August to 16 September
2014, paragraph 165.
196
Ibid.
197
See law “On special aspects of regulation of property and land matters in the Republic
of Crimea” (31 July 2014), Resolution of the ‘State Council of the Republic of Crimea’
“On aspects of administration of the property of the Republic of Crimea” (30 April 2014)
with subsequent amendments. Other legal acts seeking to facilitate the process of
nationalization include the law “On the administration and disposition of state-owned
property in the Republic of Crimea” (8 August 2014), and the Resolution of the ‘State
Council of the Republic of Crimea’ “On property nationalization of agricultural
companies, institutions and organizations in the Republic of Crimea” (26 March 2014).
198
This figure is based on information collected by OHCHR from open sources.
199
In the city of Sevastopol, nationalization was conducted in accordance with a Resolution
of the Sevastopol city government “On some aspects of the nationalization of property” (28
February 2015) with subsequent amendments.
200
See Resolutions of the Sevastopol city Government “On some aspects of the
nationalization of property” No. 118-ПП, 123-ПП, 662-ПП of 28 February 2015, 28
February 2015 and 8 July 2016 respectively.
201
Articles 46 and 56, 1907 Hague Regulations.
202
Ibid. Article 55.
203
See “The Integration of Formerly Deported People in Crimea, Ukraine”; Needs
Assessment of the OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities, August 2013, pp. 915.
204
Presidential Decree No. 615/2010 proposed taking “measures, in accordance with
established procedures, for facilitating the adoption of the Concept of the State ethno-

ix

national policy and programmes for the period until 2015 for resettlement of Crimean
Tatars, other persons deported on the ground of ethnic origin, and their descendants who
have returned or are returning to Ukraine for permanent residence, their adaptation and
integration in Ukrainian society.”
205
On 10 May 2014, the Russian Federation Minister of Crimean Affairs stated at a press
conference that the Russian authorities would deal with cases of unauthorized acquisition
of land in Crimea "with full responsibility and caution”; see OHCHR report on the human
rights situation in Ukraine, 7 May to 7 June 2014, paragraph 320.
206
Law ‘On provision of land plots which are in state or municipal property and on certain
issues
of
land
relations’
(15
January
2015),
available
at
http://crimea.gov.ru/textdoc/ru/7/act/66z.pdf.
207
Resolution No. 2206 “On the demolition of illegally constructed buildings in the
municipal district of Simferopol”, adopted on 23 September 2016.
208
See Article 11(1), International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
Article 17(1), International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Article 1, European
Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; and UN Committee on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR); General Comment No. 7: The right to
adequate housing (Art. 11.1): forced evictions, 20 May 1997, E/1998/22
209
See Resolutions 1993/77 and 2004/28 of the United Nations Commission on Human
Rights.
210
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 February to 15 May 2015,
paragraph 163.
211
See “Report of the Human Rights Assessment Mission on Crimea (6-18 July
2015)”,OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and High
Commissioner for National Minorities, paragraph 258, 17 September 2015, available at:
http://www.osce.org/odihr/report-of-the-human-rights-assessment-mission-oncrimea?download=true
212
See law No.1236/30-10 (4 April 2017), which regulates the use of official languages in
the spheres of education, legislation, public relations, official correspondence and daily life.
213
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 May to 16 August 2016,
paragraphs 176-177.
214
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 August to 15 November
2016, paragraphs 167 to 169.
215
See Application of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and of the International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination (Ukraine v. Russian Federation); Request for the indication of provisional
measures, 19 April 2017, General List No. 166, paragraph 106.
216
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, CERD/C/RUS/CO/23-24.
217
See Article 26, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Articles 2 and 13,
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; Article 29, Convention on
the Right of the Child; Article 5, Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination; Article 10, Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against
Women ; Articles 1, 2 and 5, UNESCO Convention against Discrimination in Education;
Articles 26 and 29, International Labor Organization Convention concerning Indigenous
and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries, No. 169.
218
See Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 13,
(twenty-first session, 1999), the right to education (article 13 of the Covenant),
E/C.12/1999/10, 8 December 1999, paragraphs 51-52.
219
See Information on the Situation in the Republic of Crimea (Russian Federation) in the
Fields of UNESCO Competence, Received from Russian Competent Authorities (As of 10
October 2014); 195 EX/5.INF.5, Paris, 21 October 2014, p.14.

x

220

See “Situation with Access to Education in the Native Language in Crimea”, Crimean
Human Rights Group, available at:
http://www.civicsolidarity.org/sites/default/files/detailed_report_education_crimea_a4_.pd
f.
221
The university was made a part of the Crimean Federal University (CFU) as the Taurida
Academy in Crimea. Following this, the Ukrainian authorities relocated the Vernadsky
Taurida National University to mainland Ukraine, and reopened it in Kyiv on 27 September
2016.
222
See Application of the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism and of the International Convention on the Elimination of all forms of racial
discrimination (Ukraine v. Russian Federation); Request for the indication of provisional
measures, 19 April 2017, General List No. 166, paragraph 106.
223
According to the Crimean Tatar NGO Maarifchi, among 1st grade children in September
2016, 825 out of approximately 20,000 were educated in the Crimean Tatar language.
224
See “Situation with Access to Education in the Native Language in Crimea”, Crimean
Human Rights Group, available at:
http://www.civicsolidarity.org/sites/default/files/detailed_report_education_crimea_a4_.pd
f.
225
https://www.15minut.org/news/172009-sevastopolskie-vrachi-uvolnyayutsya-iz-zanizkih-zarplat-i-vysokih-cen-na-zhile.
226
HRMMU interview, 20 December 2016.
227
This information was mentioned by the Minister of Health of Crimea in November
2016.
See
http://podpricelom.com.ua/en/read/social-analitics-read/minister-medicalcenters-crimea-staffed-doctors-one-third.html.
228
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2015,
paragraph 186.
229
The Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights expressed its concern “about
the continued ban on the medical use of methadone and buprenorphine for treatment of
drug dependence” in the Russian Federation “and the fact that the Government does not
support opioid substitution therapy (OST) and needle and syringe programmes.” See fifth
periodic report of the Russian Federation (E/C.12/RUS/5), Concluding Observations, 1
June 2011, paragraph 29.
230
In Crimea, OST was legal since 2006.
231
See “Substitution maintenance treatment in Ukraine: Humanitarian and medical
mission 16-21 May 2014”, Expert report of the Pompidou Group, P-PG/ (2014) Misc. 1rev.
232
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/20/ukrainian-drug-addicts-dying-due-totreatment-ban-says-un.
233
http://www.rferl.org/a/crimeas-methadone-ban-hitting-rehab-patientshard/25429665.html.
234
http://podpricelom.com.ua/en/read/social-analitics-read/increase-hiv-incidencerecorded-crimea.html.
235
See Article 11, International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights; Articles 24(2)(c)
and 27, Convention on the Right of the Child; and Article 28, CRPD; and Article 25,
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
236
Article 54(2), Customary International Humanitarian Law.
237
OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 15 June 2014, paragraph 322.
238
http://tass.ru/en/economy/749184.
239
http://tass.ru/en/russia/790555.
240
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No 4, The Right
to Adequate Housing (Article 11(1) of the Covenant), 13 December 1991, paragraph 8(b),
E/1992/23, Annex 3.

xi

241

OHCHR report on the human rights situation in Ukraine, 16 May to 15 August 2016,
paragraph 200.
242
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 3: The
Nature of States Parties' Obligations (Art. 2, Para. 1, of the Covenant), 14 December 1990,
E/1991/23.
243
Under international human rights law, the Government remains obliged to ensure the
satisfaction of minimum essential levels of social and economic rights (e.g. primary health
care, essential food stuff, basic shelter and housing and most basic forms of education); see
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, General Comment No. 3, ibid.

xii

