(
(
(
leclassified Case NI/I/# 7813~Da.te
8-25-2025
EYES ONLY
DO. NOT COPY _
LIMITED.ACCESS
2470
MEMORANDUM OF CONVERSATION
SUBJECT:
PARTICIPANTS:
DATE, TIME
. AND PLACE:
Meeting with President of Russia (U)
United States
The President
.. Bill Burns, U.S. Ambassador to Russia
Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State
Stephen Hadley, Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs
Judy Ansley,. Deputy Assistant to the -
President and Deputy National Security
Advisor for Regional Affairs
Nik Sorokin, Interpreter
Russia
Vladimir Putin, President of Russia
Sergey Lavrov, Foreign Minister
Yuri Ushakov, Russian Ambassador to the
United States
Sergey Prikhodko, Foreign Policy Advisor
Igor Nev.erov, Notetaker
Yuriy Gariyev, Interpreter
April 6, 2008, 10:00 - 11:00 a.m.
State Residence of the President of Russia
Bocharov Ruchey, Round Room, Sochi Russia
President Putin: Once again I'd like to welcome you all here.
We have been preparing for this -meeting and your visit not only
for a long·time but quite intensively. And this work has been
based on proposals from Condi on a strategic -framework for our
relations. I believe this is a go6d {aea. Of course, certain
differences exist between us. We know about them, but it's ·
important to· cement the positive achievements .- This is the way
to go. (~
~SRH . LIMITED ACCESS
Classified by: John I. Pray, Jr.
Reason: l.4(b) (d) ·
Declassify on: 4/7/18
CAUTION: A Memorandum of a Meeting Conversation (MEMCON)- is not a verbatim· t ranscript of a
discussion. The· text in this document records the notes and recollections of NSC policy s taff
who attended the meeting and memorialized the conversation in written form ,
An interpreter facilitated this conversation. Differences in interpretation may result i n subtle
differences in the exact meaning of_ph.rases..
NW#:78134 Docid:34685227(
(
(
2
Back in 2002 we signed the 'Moscow Declaration, and if today we
are able to submit a document for agreement, -that is the right
way to go·. The document we' re wo;rking on today sums up the
positive achievements of the las·t few years. At the same time,
the agreement reflects oui disagreements but does so .in an open
and tra_ nsparent· manner and ·reaffirms our willingness to work out
these. differences. ·AA
It is ·natural _ that ·one :of the most difficuit issues is missile
defense. There hasn't been any major progress here, however I
do take note that our· America.n partners are frankly and openly
looking at our concerns. We realize the most important thing is
to ensure transparency and ongoing monitoring of· sites i 'n the
Czech Republic and Poland. When Condi and Secretary Gates were
in Moscow· ! told them it's very important for us to-see what's
going on in those sites ·every day and every moment. I've told
that to the Czechs and Poles as well. It's not about any
infringement on their sovereignty. It's natural that we see
what's going on .and whether it's targeted against us. It'.s that
simple. The military shares tl+is yiew, ·even the u~s. military.
I won't go into details; let the experts ·go into that . The ·
fundamental issue here is whether our experts have full· access
to the sites. or are just stationed at the embassy and need
permission to visit the sites from time to time. And what is
also ~ritically important is for.our experts on both sides to
expand exchanges and deepen their cooperation. I think we
.·should not give up on _ this 'idea, especially since there.' s
intere.st about this by the U.s·. rn.i.litary. At the same time, we
.understand that elements of the third site have riot just a
·regional .but a global dimension. t'S.). · ·
A couple of words on START; there.is a section on START. We
discussed this with our U.S. colleagues in detail, and I believe
there should be a certain understanding of our concerns. It is
.clear that withdrawing from any kind of controls on nuclear
warheads is a dangerous thing to do. (~
The President: we need to work on that. I'm concerned about
transparency on what looks like a nuclear launch and everyone
panics. We need to work this out. Let me just say I understand
your ·concerns. i'G,l
. President Putin: I ·think this has advanced with us, but with
the Chinese we have no such agreement. They refuse to agree on
more notification of launches. ~
9SCR:f:l'1?
NW#: 781_ 34 Docid:34685227
·I(
(
(
3
The President: Yes, they'll be dangerous in a few years.
President Putin: Mr. Lavrov is working on this with them but
there is no do9ument yet. But it should be clear t hat in our
·relations with the U.S. the issue is quite clear too. A missile
·. launch from a submarine _in Northern ·Europe will only take six
minutes to reach Moscow. ~
The Pr~sident: I ~nderstand. {U)
President Putin: And we have established a set of response
measures -- there's nothing good about· it. Within a few minutes
our entire nuciear response capability will be in the sky . ~ -
The President: I know. {U)
President Putin: And if we talk about
other oceans-, we have to calculate the
missiles. It's a very complex thing.
other .opportunity to destroy Bin Laden
to find a solution. ('!sJ
launches from areas of
traj ectory of the
I realize there may be no
in Tora Bora,· but we need
The President: Some think it's an important tool, but I
unqerstand your concerns about sending the wrong messages. I
don't want to put someone in quick response moments where.the
whole system is to react . That creates the possibility for
mistake. I agree with you on that. ~
President Putin: I believe that in spite of all the
difficulties experts can find an agreement, but it's a matter of
trust. We also realize that some counterterrorism operations
may be launched and the services don't disclose until the last
moment, but something needs to be worked out . ·.t'S1,.
The President: I'm worried about the next ones who will come to
power. We need to work something out while we have an open
·rela.tionship. so the next ones don't overreact . That's why this I
agreement _is very important. Secondly, we got the 123
agreement; that's very good. ~
Foreign Minister Lavrov: We don't have it yet; we will. {U)
The President: I understood it . would be signed by the end .of
April. On CFE, hopefully we can help you on the i s sue. ~ fully
understand· what you said at NATO . Your logic is very clear. .We
talked in the car about sending the treaty to the Senate and
being the_ first to ratify. I don't want to drop it in the
s;e;g.;iiii.:
NW#:78134 Do.cid: 34685227(
(
(
~f3CRB'i? 4
. .
middle of a political firestorm-with a~l the Presidential
politics. I don't want Russia• to become a campaign issue. The
relationship is too. important. ~
On missile defense, I think the thing that will intrigue people
is transparency and confidence building measures and the idea of
exploring a regional missile defense sys~em where Russia will
benefit like everyone else. I think once the government becomes
convinced· the system isn't aimed at you, Russia will see a
regiorial system can deal with so.me nut in the Midqle East· who
might get a missile .with a nuclear weapon. You'll see the
•system canno_ t possibly intercept more than one or two missiles.
You have a lot more than that. Anyway; that's what confidence
is all about . ~
I' il say to the press that you don't. like the idea of the Czech
and Polish sites .. It's· importa,nt people know there's still
disagreement on that, but its important for our people ·to see
we're working through an agreement based on transparency and
true confideri'ce building measures. The .reason I think it's
important is it will cause a future u.S. President to have_to
work with Russia. We're setting the stag~ for creating the
conditions that will cause people to -work in the framework we've
set up. There needs·. to be ·a path .forward for better relations
with Russia. I don't· want -a U.S. President to come along· and
say we don't need relations with Russia. I think we do, and
that's really _the reason why this is important and why I
appreciate you meeting us. ~ .
President Putin: What you've just said is very important. Ail
the preceding decades the world .was a safer place because there
was a certain balance. in place. And the m.:j..11.tary has ··come to me
now, they tell me the ·following : ·"There was the balance and t he
threat of Mutual Assured Destruction. Now,· t he Americans are
going to build a missile defense umbrella and have the feeling.
that they are invincible." What should we do? Either create the
same -umbrella or our own strike systems to neutralize their
defenses. Creating a missile def~nse ·system is quite expensive.
It's simpler and cheaper to create ·a new strike .system which
would. overwhelm your defenses. And they're already coming to me
with proposals t}:lat strike me as very barbaric. ·. When I read
them I'm horrified. And not building a platform for our
cooperation on this front, we':i;e forced with this type of arms
race. ("S)
The President: That's why this is so important. You won't be
comfortable until we can prove it· to you. Our intention is one
86€~'1\
NW#: 7813_ 4 Doc.Id: 34685227(
(
(
5
or two. single launches to counter a North Korean or Iranian or
whatever threat emerges. We need to calm your experts down by
showing them the truth. That's why transparency is important.
My vision is a joint operation. That's what this sfarts
hopefully. · f-e)
President Putin: Okay. Now I'd like to repeat what I said to
Condi and Gates in Moscow on NATO enlargement . It won't be new
to you, •and I don't expect a response; I just .want to ,say it out
loud. I'd like to emphasize accession to NATO of a country like
. Ukraine will create for the long-t.erm a field of conflict for
you and us, long-term confrontation. ("&)
The President: Why? (U)
President Putin: .Seventeen million Russians live in Ukraine
a third of the population. Ukraine is a very complex state.
This is not a nation built in a natural manner. It's an
artificial country created .back in Soviet times . Following
1
World War II Ukraine obtained territory from Poland, Romania and
Hungary - that's pretty much all of western Ukraine. In the
1920s and 1930s Ukraine obtained territory from Russia -- that's
the eastern part of the country. · In 1956, the Crimean peninsula
was transferred to Ukraine. It's a rather ·1arge European
country built with a population o_f 45 million. It's populated
by people with very different mindsets. If you go to western
Ukraine you' 11 se·e villages where the ·only spoken language is
Hungarian and people we~r those bonnets. In the east, people
.are wearing suits, ties and big hats. NATO is perceived by a
large part of the Ukrainian population as a hostile
organization. ~
This creates the following problems for Russia. This creates
the threat of military bases and new military systems being
deployed in the proximity of Russia. It created uncertainties
and threats for us. And relying on the .anti-NATO forces in
Ukraine, Russia would be working on stripping NATO of the
possibility of enlarging. Russia would be creating problems
there all the time. What for? What is the meaning of Ukrainian
membership in NATO? What benefit is there for NA.TO and the U.S.?
There can be only one reason for it and that would be to cement
Ukraine's status as in the Western world and that would be the
logic. I don't think it's the right logic; I'm trying to
comprehend. And given the divergent views of areas of the
population ·on NATO membership, the country could just split
apart. I always said there's a certain pro~Western part, and a
certain pro-Russia part. Now the power there is held by the
-pro-W~stern leaders. As s9on as they came to power they spl it
OEC~~'l'
NW#:78134 Docid:34685227(
(
{
6
within themselves. The political activity there fully reflects
the attitudes of the popula~ion. The issue there is ~ot
accession to NATO, but to ensure the self-sufficiency of
Ukraine , Also, their economy should be strengthened. ('So,)
Seventy percent of the population is against NATO. Condi told
me in Slovakia and Croatia the population was opposed at first
and they're now in favor. What we are against is Ukraine's
accession to NATO, but in any case we should wait until a
majority of ·the population is in favor, then -let them accede,
not vice versa. t"S.l
.Now with Georgia, they believe with the shield of NATO they can
restore their territorial integrity. Is this the right way to
go, to spread NATO's military umbrella and let them start
military operations in Ankhazia ·and South Ossetia? Guerilla
warfare will start there as in Afghanistan. Will NATO go to war
there? Of course not. The people. in Georgia should be forced·
to resolve their internal problems by other means. They wil l do
it if forced to. There are ethnic problems there tha_ t have
lasted for centuries. We're ready to help them restore thei r
territorial integrity, but _ in ways that make the small ethnic
.groups feel secure. But if they scare people with the thr· eat of
NATO coming there, it won't work. They won't be able to do .it
anyway. _You'll see people coming down from the mountains and
shooting in every direction . People dressed like those who
danced for you last night. Russia.knows this well and has been
developing friends there. When war was here 10 years ago
Chechens ceased their operations· against Russia and came. to
fight there. They played soccer with the heads cif Georgians.
One of their leaders, two years ago we eliminated him, but there
are. many more there. We didn't send them there, but they were
all here when the war started. ~
Georgia should be caused to address this issue by peaceful
means. Letting them into NATO will only encourage them to
address this by military means; taking up arms. And for Russia
there is always the threat of new military bases and weapon
systems in the proximity of our borders. This is pretty much·
our argumentation against th.is development. I don't expect a·
reaction. ~)
· The President: One of the things
weren't afraid to say it to NATO.
People listened carefully and had
It was a good performance. ~
I admire about you is you
That's very admi_rabie.
no doubt about your position.
NW#:78134 Doc.Id:34685227(
(
(
SECRE'f' 7
President Putin: I would add another thing now. I do .not rul~
out that Russia-NATO relations could improve in the future,
along with
U. s. -Russia relations. ~
The President: What I'm concerned about is U.S.-Russia
relations won't get better than _what you and I have·. History
will show it's very good. I'm not sure about the next group --
not Medvedev, but who~ollows me. I hope you and I can set the
example for ·how to _ work through problems. · \So)
President Putin: I agree . . What I mean is if there is such
improvement then many of the problems we have concern with now
will be perceived differently in the future. I think ceitain .
issues don't need to be rushed. ~
.Now. a couple of words on the peaceful nuclear field. Here we ·
need a framework; an inter-governmental agreement. _ You wrote ·in
.your letter that such an agreement will be signed. ·("St
The President: It will get done before your presidency is up.
(U)
President Putin: Maybe on your side you could work with your
Congress.
(U)
The President: We want ·to do it now. I think it will be well-
received. ('SJ
Secretary Rice_ : We needed to resolve an issue with Iran. I
think we've resolved it·. We were concerned we would 'have had
problems with Congress. ~
President Putin: Everything is under control there. sometimes
there are instances of cooperation they're trying to pursue in a ·
clandestine manner that's not apparent to the government. We
will find them and they will_ be punished. ~
The President: Where is this being done? (U)
Secretary Rice: Arak. (U)
President Putin: There are peopl e willing to earn a bit of
money on this, but we identify those cases. ~
NW#:78134 Docid: 34685227(
(
'8
The President: I tell people on Iran, your plan was very
ingenious. The leaders say they want civilian nuclear power, we
. say, · "Fine, · that's your right;" Russia says, "Here's the fuel,
therefore you don't need to enrich. If you do it shows you
don't want civil nuclear power, you want more." People say, "Can
you work with Putin?" r. say, "Here's the example. He took the··
lead on Iran and I followed." It was the right thing to do. (~)
President Putin: That's what I told them. in Iran when they said
they were building a new nuclear power plant, and they needed
fuel. · I asked when would they complete the plant. It's a long-
term project. We've been building Busher for 15 years. I said,
"You won't complete a new plant for 15 years, .so why are you
building up enrichment now?" ~ ·
The President: ·You and I had a conversation about the S-300 and
you said you'd wait to see how they behave a conditional
sale, and I appreciate that. ~
President Putin: We have a contract with them signed four years
ago but not being implemented. C'S,)
The President: ··I appreciate that. They'-re· nutty.
President Putin: They're quite nuts. ~
The President: Hc;ipefully rational .people will .start showing up.
You .talk to them, we don't. We hope tq have more rational
people show up; we'd like to have a better relationship. ('S.)
President Putin: What surprised ·me when I was there, they may ·
be-crazy in their ideology ·but they're intellectuals. They are
educated in university, come from an academic environment -
including Amadinejad, his entourage, the Speaker of parliament.
They are not primitive people: It was .quite a surprise .to me.
~
The President: (To Secretary Rice and Foreign Minister Lavrov)
Do .you have the language done on this..thing yet? You two go' and
work on it. (U)
Secretary Rice: We're very close.
I have a proposal· for you. (U)
(To Foreign Minister Lavrov)
The President: Will you be in the meeting with ·Medvedev? (U)
President Putin: No, I want you to talk·to him personally. (U)
9ECfil1eT
NW#:78134 Docid:34685227(
(
(
' . . \
OEORB9? 9
The President: I won't need much time. (U}
Secretary Rice: So we use "assuage" and remove the brackets on
"cooperation." (U)
End of Conversation
-Bi3e~~T
NW#:78134 Docid:34685227